
chapter i.





over the sierras nevadas.

the beauties of nature are scattered with a more lavish hand across the
country lying between the summit of the sierra nevada mountains and the
shores where the surf romps and rolls over the auriferous sands of the
pacific, in golden gate park, than in a journey of the same length in
any other part of the world.  such, at least, is the verdict of many whose
fortune it has been to traverse that favored stretch of country.  nothing
but the limited power of man's eyes prevents him from standing on the
top of the mountains and surveying, at a glance, the whole glorious
panorama that stretches away for more than two hundred miles to the west,
terminating in the gleaming waters of the pacific ocean.  could he do
this, he would behold, for the first seventy-five or eighty miles, a
vast, billowy sea of foot-hills, clothed with forests of sombre pine and
bright, evergreen oaks; and, lower down, dense patches of white-blossomed
chaparral, looking in the enchanted distance like irregular banks of
snow.  then the world-renowned valley of the sacramento river, with its
level plains of dark, rich soil, its matchless fields of ripening grain,
traversed here and there by streams that, emerging from the shadowy
depths of the foot-hills, wind their way, like gleaming threads of silver,
across the fertile plain and join the sacramento, which receives them,
one and all, in her matronly bosom and hurries with them n to the sea.

towns and villages, with white church-spires, irregularly sprinkled over
hill and vale, although sown like seeds from the giant hand of a mighty
husbandman, would be seen nestling snugly amid groves of waving shade
and semi-tropical fruit trees.  beyond all this the lower coast-range,
where, toward san francisco, mount diablo and mount tamalpais - grim
sentinels of the golden gate - rear their shaggy heads skyward, and seem
to look down with a patronizing air upon the less pretentious hills that
border the coast and reflect their shadows in the blue water of san
francisco bay.  upon the sloping sides of these hills sweet, nutritious
grasses grow, upon which peacefully graze the cows that supply san
francisco with milk and butter.

various attempts have been made from time to time, by ambitious cyclers,
to wheel across america from ocean to ocean; but - "around the world!"

"the impracticable scheme of a visionary," was the most charitable
verdict one could reasonably have expected.

the first essential element of success, however, is to have sufficient
confidence in one's self to brave the criticisms - to say nothing of the
witticisms - of a sceptical public.  so eight o'clock on the morning of
april 22, 1884, finds me and my fifty-inch machine on the deck of the
alameda, one of the splendid ferry-boats plying between san francisco
and oakland, and a ride of four miles over the sparkling waters of the
bay lands us, twenty-eight minutes later, on the oakland pier, that juts
far enough out to allow the big ferries to enter the slip in deep water.
on the beauties of san francisco bay it is, perhaps, needless to dwell,
as everybody has heard or read of this magnificent sheet of water, its
surface flecked with snowy sails, and surrounded by a beautiful framework
of evergreen hills; its only outlet to the ocean the famous golden gate - a
narrow channel through which come and go the ships of all nations.

with the hearty well-wishing of a small group of oakland and 'frisco
cyclers who have come, out of curiosity, to see the start, i mount and
ride away to the east, down san pablo avenue, toward the village of the
same spanish name, some sixteen miles distant.  the first seven miles are
a sort of half-macadamized road, and i bowl briskly along.

the past winter has been the rainiest since 1857, and the continuous
pelting rains had not beaten down upon the last half of this imperfect
macadam in vain; for it has left it a surface of wave-like undulations,
from out of which the frequent bowlder protrudes its unwelcome head, as
if ambitiously striving to soar above its lowly surroundings.  but this
one don't mind, and i am perfectly willing to put up with the bowlders
for the sake of the undulations.  the sensation of riding a small boat
over "the gently-heaving waves of the murmuring sea" is, i think, one
of the pleasures of life; and the next thing to it is riding a bicycle
over the last three miles of the san pablo avenue macadam as i found it
on that april morning.

the wave-like macadam abruptly terminates, and i find myself on a common
dirt road.  it is a fair road, however, and i have plenty of time to look
about and admire whatever bits of scenery happen to come in view.  there
are few spots in the "golden state" from which views of more or less
beauty are not to be obtained; and ere i am a baker's dozen of miles
from oakland pier i find myself within an ace of taking an undesirable
header into a ditch of water by the road-side, while looking upon a scene
that for the moment completely wins me from my immediate surroundings.
there is nothing particularly grand or imposing in the outlook here; but
the late rains have clothed the whole smiling face of nature with a
bright, refreshing green, that fails not to awaken a thrill of pleasure
in the breast of one fresh from the verdureless streets of a large sea-
port city.  broad fields of pale-green, thrifty-looking young wheat, and
darker-hued meads, stretch away on either side of the road; and away
beyond to the left, through an opening in the hills, can be seen, as
through a window, the placid waters of the bay, over whose glittering,
sunlit surface white-winged, aristocratic yachts and the plebeian smacks
of greek and italian fishermen swiftly glide, and fairly vie with each
other in giving the finishing touches to a picture.

so far, the road continues level and fairly good; and, notwithstanding
the seductive pleasures of the ride over the bounding billows of the
gently heaving macadam, the dalliance with the scenery, and the all too
frequent dismounts in deference to the objections of phantom-eyed
roadsters, i pulled up at san pablo at ten o'clock, having covered the
sixteen miles in one hour and thirty-two minutes; though, of course,
there is nothing speedy about this - to which desirable qualification,
indeed, i lay no claim.

soon after leaving san pablo the country gets somewhat "choppy," and
the road a succession of short-hills, at the bottom of which modest-looking
mud-holes patiently await an opportunity to make one's acquaintance, or
scraggy-looking, latitudinous washouts are awaiting their chance to
commit a murder, or to make the unwary cycler who should venture to "coast,"
think he had wheeled over the tail of an earthquake.  one never
minds a hilly road where one can reach the bottom with an impetus that
sends him spinning half-way up the next; but where mud-holes or washouts
resolutely "hold the fort" in every depression, it is different, and
the progress of the cycler is necessarily slow.  i have set upon reaching
suisun, a point fifty miles along the central pacific railway, to-night;
but the roads after leaving san pablo are anything but good, and the day
is warm, so six p.m. finds me trudging along an unridable piece of road
through the low tuile swamps that border suisun bay.  "tuile" is the
name given to a species of tall rank grass, or rather rush, that grows
to the height of eight or ten feet, and so thick in places that it is
difficult to pass through, in the low, swampy grounds in this part of
california.  these tuile swamps are traversed by a net-work of small,
sluggish streams and sloughs, that fairly swarm with wild ducks and
geese, and justly entitle them to their local title of "the duck-hunters'
paradise." ere i am through this swamp, the shades of night gather
ominously around and settle down like a pall over the half-flooded flats;
the road is full of mud-holes and pools of water, through which it is
difficult to navigate, and i am in something of a quandary.  i am sweeping
along at the irresistible velocity of a mile an hour, and wondering how
far it is to the other end of the swampy road, when thrice welcome succor
appears from a strange and altogether unexpected source.  i had noticed
a small fire, twinkling through the darkness away off in the swamp; and
now the wind rises and the flames of the small fire spread to the thick
patches of dead tuile.  in a short time the whole country, including my
road, is lit up by the fierce glare of the blaze; so that i am enabled
to proceed with little trouble.  these tuiles often catch on fire in the
fall and early winter, when everything is comparatively dry, and fairly
rival the prairie fires of the western plains in the fierceness of the
flames.

the next morning i start off in a drizzling rain, and, after going sixteen
miles, i have to remain for the day at elmira.  here, among other items
of interest, i learn that twenty miles farther ahead the sacramento river
is flooding the country, and the only way i can hope to get through is
to take to the central pacific track and cross over the six miles of
open trestle-work that spans the sacramento river and its broad bottom-lands,
that are subject to the annual spring overflow.  from elmira my way leads
through a fruit and farming country that is called second to none in the
world.  magnificent farms line the road; at short intervals appear large
well-kept vineyards, in which gangs of chinese coolies are hoeing and
pulling weeds, and otherwise keeping trim.  a profusion of peach, pear,
and almond orchards enlivens the landscape with a wealth of pink and
white blossoms, and fills the balmy spring air with a subtle, sensuous
perfume that savors of a tropical clime.

already i realize that there is going to be as much "foot-riding" as
anything for the first part of my journey; so, while halting for dinner
at the village of davisville, i deliver my rather slight shoes over to
the tender mercies of an irish cobbler of the old school, with carte
blanche instructions to fit them out for hard service.  while diligently
hammering away at the shoes, the old cobbler grows communicative, and
in almost unintelligible brogue tells a complicated tale of irish life,
out of which i can make neither head, tail, nor tale; though nodding and
assenting to it all, to the great satisfaction of the loquacious manipulator
of the last, who in an hour hands over the shoes with the proud assertion,
"they'll last yez, be jabbers, to omaha."

reaching the overflowed country, i have to take to the trestle-work and
begin the tedious process of trundling along that aggravating roadway,
where, to the music of rushing waters, i have to step from tie to tie,
and bump, bump, bump, my machine along for six weary miles.  the sacramento
river is the outlet for the tremendous volumes of water caused every
spring by the melting snows on the sierra nevada mountains, and these
long stretches of open trestle have been found necessary to allow the
water to pass beneath.  nothing but trains are expected to cross this
trestle-work, and of course no provision is made for pedestrians.  the
engineer of an approaching train sets his locomotive to tooting for all
she is worth as he sees a "strayed or stolen" cycler, slowly bumping
along ahead of his train.  but he has no need to slow up, for occasional
cross-beams stick out far enough to admit of standing out of reach, and
when he comes up alongside, he and the fireman look out of the window
of the cab and see me squatting on the end of one of these handy beams,
and letting the bicycle hang over.

that night i stay in sacramento, the beautiful capital of the golden
state, whose well-shaded streets and blooming, almost tropical gardens
combine to form a city of quiet, dignified beauty, of which californians
feel justly proud.  three and a half miles east of sacramento, the high
trestle bridge spanning the main stream of the american river has to be
crossed, and from this bridge is obtained a remarkably fine view of the
snow-capped sierras, the great barrier that separates the fertile valleys
and glorious climate of california, from the bleak and barren sage-brush
plains, rugged mountains, and forbidding wastes of sand and alkali, that,
from the summit of the sierras, stretch away to the eastward for over a
thousand miles.  the view from the american river bridge is grand and
imposing, encompassing the whole foot-hill country, which rolls in broken,
irregular billows of forest-crowned hill and charming vale, upward and
onward to the east, gradually getting more rugged, rocky, and immense,
the hills changing to mountains, the vales to caons, until they terminate
in bald, hoary peaks whose white rugged pinnacles seem to penetrate the
sky, and stand out in ghostly, shadowy outline against the azure depths
of space beyond.

after crossing the american river the character of the country changes,
and i enjoy a ten-mile ride over a fair road, through one of those
splendid sheep-ranches that are only found in california, and which have
long challenged the admiration of the world.  sixty thousand acres, i
am informed, is the extent of this pasture, all within one fence.  the
soft, velvety greensward is half-shaded by the wide-spreading branches
of evergreen oaks that singly and in small groups are scattered at
irregular intervals from one end of the pasture to the other, giving it
the appearance of one of the old ancestral parks of england.  as i bowl
pleasantly along i involuntarily look about me, half expecting to see
some grand, stately old mansion peeping from among some one of the
splendid oak-groves; and when a jack-rabbit hops out and halts at twenty
paces from my road, i half hesitate to fire at him, lest the noise of
the report should bring out the vigilant and lynx-eyed game-keeper, and
get me "summoned" for poaching.  i remember the pleasant ten-mile ride
through this park-like pasture as one of the brightest spots of the whole
journey across america.  but "every rose conceals a thorn," and pleasant
paths often load astray; when i emerge from the pasture i find myself
several miles off the right road and have to make my unhappy way across
lots, through numberless gates and small ranches, to the road again.

there seems to be quite a sprinkling of spanish or mexican rancheros
through here, and after partaking of the welcome noon-tide hospitality
of one of the ranches, i find myself, before i realize it, illustrating
the bicycle and its uses, to a group of sombrero-decked rancheros and
darked-eyed seoritas, by riding the machine round and round on their
own ranch-lawn.  it is a novel position, to say the least; and often
afterward, wending my solitary way across some dreary nevada desert,
with no company but my own uncanny shadow, sharply outlined on the white
alkali by the glaring rays of the sun, my untrammelled thoughts would
wander back to this scene, and i would grow "hot and cold by turns," in
my uncertainty as to whether the bewitching smiles of the seoritas were
smiles of admiration, or whether they were simply "grinning" at the
figure i cut.  while not conscious of having cut a sorrier figure than
usual on that occasion, somehow i cannot rid myself of an unhappy, ban-
owing suspicion, that the latter comes nearer the truth than the former.

the ground is gradually getting more broken; huge rocks intrude themselves
upon the landscape.  at the town of rocklin we are supposed to enter the
foot-hill country proper.  much of the road in these lower foot-hills is
excellent, being of a hard, stony character, and proof against the winter
rains.  everybody who writes anything about the golden state is expected
to say something complimentary - or otherwise, as his experience may seem
to dictate - about the "glorious climate of california;" or else render
an account of himself for the slight, should he ever return, which he
is very liable to do.  for, no matter what he may say about it, the "glorious climate"
generally manages to make one, ever after, somewhat
dissatisfied with the extremes of heat and cold met with in less genial
regions.  this fact of having to pay my measure of tribute to the climate
forces itself on my notice prominently here at rocklin, because, in-
directly, the "climate" was instrumental in bringing about a slight
accident, which, in turn, brought about the - to me - serious calamity of
sending me to bed without any supper.  rocklin is celebrated - and by
certain bad people, ridiculed - all over this part of the foot-hills for
the superabundance of its juvenile population.  if one makes any inquisitive
remarks about this fact, the rocklinite addressed will either blush or
grin, according to his temperament, and say, "it's the glorious climate."
a bicycle is a decided novelty up here, and, of course, the multitudinous
youth turn out in droves to see it.  the bewildering swarms of these small
mountaineers distract my attention and cause me to take a header that
temporarily disables the machine.  the result is, that, in order to reach
the village where i wish to stay over night, i have to "foot it" over
four miles of the best road i have found since leaving san pablo, and
lose my supper into the bargain, by procrastinating at the village smithy,
so as to have my machine in trim, ready for an early start next morning.
if the "glorious climate of california " is responsible for the exceedingly
hopeful prospects of rocklin's future census reports, and the said lively
outlook, materialized, is responsible for my mishap, then plainly the
said "g.  c. of c." is the responsible element in the case.  i hope this
compliment to the climate will strike the californians as about the
correct thing; but, if it should happen to work the other way, i beg of
them at once to pour out the vials of their wrath on the heads of the
'frisco bicycle club, in order that their fury may be spent ere i again
set foot on their auriferous soil.

"what'll you do when you hit the snow?" is now a frequent question asked
by the people hereabouts, who seem to be more conversant with affairs
pertaining to the mountains than they are of what is going on in the
valleys below.  this remark, of course, has reference to the deep snow
that, toward the summits of the mountains, covers the ground to the depth
of ten feet on the level, and from that to almost any depth where it has
drifted and accumulated.  i have not started out on this greatest of all
bicycle tours without looking into these difficulties, and i remind them
that the long snow-sheds of the central pacific railway make it possible
for one to cross over, no matter how deep the snow may lie on the ground
outside.  some speak cheerfully of the prospects for getting over, but
many shake their heads ominously and say, "you'll never be able to make
it through."

rougher and more hilly become the roads as we gradually penetrate farther
and farther into the foot-hills.  we are now in far-famed placer county,
and the evidences of the hardy gold diggers' work in pioneer days are
all about us.  in every gulch and ravine are to be seen broken and decaying
sluice-boxes.  bare, whitish-looking patches of washed-out gravel show
where a "claim " has been worked over and abandoned.  in every direction
are old water-ditches, heaps of gravel, and abandoned shafts - all telling,
in language more eloquent than word or pen, of the palmy days of '49,
and succeeding years; when, in these deep gulches, and on these yellow
hills, thousands of bronzed, red-shirted miners dug and delved, and
"rocked the cradle" for the precious yellow dust and nuggets.  but all
is now changed, and where were hundreds before, now only a few "old
timers " roam the foot-hills, prospecting, and working over the old
claims; but "dust," "nuggets," and "pockets " still form the burden of
conversation in the village barroom or the cross-roads saloon.  now and
then a "strike " is made by some lucky - or perhaps it turns out, unlucky -
prospector.  this for a few days kindles anew the slumbering spark of
"gold fever" that lingers in the veins of the people here, ever ready
to kindle into a flame at every bit of exciting news, in the way of a
lucky "find" near home, or new gold-fields in some distant land.  these
occasions never fail to have their legitimate effect upon the business
of the bar where the "old-timers" congregate to learn the news; and,
between drinks, yarns of the good old days of '49 and '50, of "streaks
of luck," of "big nuggets," and "wild times," are spun over and over
again.  although the palmy days of the "diggin's" are no more, yet the
finder of a "pocket" these days seems not a whit wiser than in the days
when "pockets" more frequently rewarded the patient prospector than
they do now; and at newcastle - a station near the old-time mining camps
of ophir and gold hill - i hear of a man who lately struck a "pocket," out
of which he dug forty thousand dollars; and forthwith proceeded to imitate
his reckless predecessors by going down to 'frisco and entering upon a
career of protracted sprees and debauchery that cut short his earthly
career in less than six months, and wafted his riotous spirit to where
there are no more forty thousand dollar pockets, and no more 'friscos
in which to squander it.  in this instance the "find" was clearly an
unlucky one.  not quite so bad was the case of two others who, but a few
days before my arrival, took out twelve hundred dollars; they simply,
in the language of the gold fields "turned themselves loose," "made
things hum," and "whooped 'em up" around the bar-room of their village
for exactly three days; when, "dead broke," they took to the gulches
again, to search for more.  "yer oughter hev happened through here with
that instrumint of yourn about that time, young fellow; yer might hev
kept as full as a tick till they war busted," remarked a slouchy-looking
old fellow whose purple-tinted nose plainly indicated that he had devoted
a good part of his existence to the business of getting himself "full
as a tick" every time he ran across the chance.

quite a different picture is presented by an industrious old mexican,
whom i happen to see away down in the bottom of a deep ravine, along
which swiftly hurries a tiny stream.  he is diligently shovelling dirt
into a rude sluice-box which he has constructed in the bed of the stream
at a point where the water rushes swiftly down a declivity.  setting my
bicycle up against a rock, i clamber down the steep bank to investigate.
in tones that savor of anything but satisfaction with the result of his
labor, he informs me that he has to work "most infernal hard" to pan
out two dollars' worth of "dust" a day.  "i have had to work over all
that pile of gravel you see yonder to clean up seventeen dollars' worth
of dust," further volunteered the old "greaser," as i picked up a spare
shovel and helped him remove a couple of bowlders that he was trying to
roll out of his war.  i condole with him at the low grade of the gravel
he is working, hope he may "strike it rich " one of these days, and
take my departure.

up here i find it preferable to keep the railway track, alongside of
which there are occasionally ridable side-paths; while on the wagon roads
little or no riding can be done on account of the hills, and the sticky
nature of the red, clayey soil.  from the railway track near newcastle
is obtained a magnificent view of the lower country, traversed during
the last three days, with the sacramento river winding its way through
its broad valley to the sea.  deep cuts and high embankments follow each
other in succession, as the road-bed is now broken through a hill, now
carried across a deep gulch, and anon winds around the next hill and
over another ravine.  before reaching auburn i pass through "bloomer
cut," where perpendicular walls of bowlders loom up on both sides of the
track looking as if the slightest touch or jar would unloose them and
send them bounding and crashing on the top of the passing train as it
glides along, or drop down on the stray cycler who might venture through.
on the way past auburn, and on up to clipper gap, the dry, yellow dirt
under the overhanging rocks, and in the crevices, is so suggestive of "
dust," that i take a small prospecting glass, which i have in my tool-bag,
and do a little prospecting; without, however, finding sufficient "color"
to induce me to abandon my journey and go to digging.

before reaching clipper gap it begins to rain; while i am taking dinner
at that place it quits raining and begins to come down by buckets full,
so that i have to lie over for the remainder of the day.  the hills around
clipper gap are gay and white with chaparral blossom, which gives the
whole landscape a pleasant, gala-day appearance.  it rains all the evening,
and at night turns to heavy, damp snow, which clings to the trees and
bushes.  in the morning the landscape, which a few hours before was white
with chaparral bloom, is now even more white with the bloom of the snow.
my hostelry at clipper gap is a kind of half ranch, half roadside inn,
down in a small valley near the railway; and mine host, a jovial irish
blade of the good old "donnybrook fair" variety, who came here in 1851,
during the great rush to the gold fields, and, failing to make his fortune
in the "diggings," wisely decided to send for his family and settle
down quietly on a piece of land, in preference to returning to the "ould
sod."he turns out to be a "bit av a sphort meself," and, after
showing me a number of minor pets and favorites, such as game chickens,
brahma geese, and a litter of young bull pups, he proudly leads the way
to the barn to show me "barney," his greatest pet of all, whom he at
present keeps securely tied up for safe-keeping.  more than one evil-minded
person has a hankering after barney's gore since his last battle for the
championship of placer county, he explains, in which he inflicted severe
punishment on his adversary and resolutely refused to give in; although
his opponent on this important occasion was an imported dog, brought
into the county by barney's enemies, who hoped to fill their pockets by
betting against the local champion.  but barney, who is a medium-sized,
ferocious-looking bull terrier, "scooped"the crowd backing the imported
dog, to the extent of their "pile," by "walking all round" his adversary;
and thereby stirring up the enmity of said crowd against himself, who - so
says barney's master - have never yet been able to scare up a dog able to
"down" barney.  as we stand in the barn-door barney eyes me suspiciously,
and then looks at his master; but luckily for me his master fails to
give the word.  noticing that the dog is scarred and seamed all over, i
inquire the reason, and am told that he has been fighting wild boars in
the chaparral, of which gentle pastime he is extremely fond.  "yes, and
he'll tackle a cougar too, of which there are plenty of them around here,
if that cowardly animal would only keep out of the trees," admiringly
continues mine host, as he orders barney into his empty salt-barrel
again.

to day is sunday, and it rains and snows with little interruption, so
that i am compelled to stay over till monday morning.  while it is raining
at clipper gap, it is snowing higher up in the mountains, and a railway
employee 'volunteers the cheering information that, during the winter,
the snow has drifted and accumulated in the sheds, so that a train can
barely squeeze through, leaving no room for a person to stand to one
side.  i have my own ideas of whether this state of affairs is probable
or not, however, and determine to pay no heed to any of these rumors,
but to push ahead.  so i pull out on monday morning and take to the
railway-track again, which is the only passable road since the tremendous
downpour of the last two days.

the first thing i come across is a tunnel burrowing through a hill.  this
tunnel was originally built the proper size, but, after being walled up,
there were indications of a general cave-in; so the company had to go
to work and build another thick rock-wall inside the other, which leaves
barely room for the trains to pass through without touching the sides.
it is anything but an inviting path around the hill; but it is far the
safer of the two.  once my foot slips, and i unceremoniously sit down and
slide around in the soft yellow clay, in my frantic endeavors to keep
from slipping down the hill.  this hardly enhances my personal appearance;
but it doesn't matter much, as i am where no one can see, and a clay-
besmeared individual is worth a dozen dead ones.  soon i am on the track
again, briskly trudging up the steep grade toward the snow-line, which
i can plainly see, at no great distance ahead, through the windings
around the mountains.

all through here the only riding to be done is along occasional short
stretches of difficult path beside the track, where it happens to be a
hard surface; and on the plank platforms of the stations, where i generally
take a turn or two to satisfy the consuming curiosity of the miners, who
can't imagine how anybody can ride a thing that won't stand alone; at
the same time arguing among themselves as to whether i ride along on one
of the rails, or bump along over the protruding ties.

this morning i follow the railway track around the famous "cape horn,"
a place that never fails to photograph itself permanently upon the memory
of all who once see it.  for scenery that is magnificently grand and
picturesque, the view from where the railroad track curves around cape
horn is probably without a peer on the american continent.

when the central pacific railway company started to grade their road-bed
around here, men were first swung over this precipice from above with
ropes, until they made standing room for themselves; and then a narrow
ledge was cut on the almost perpendicular side of the rocky mountain,
around which the railway now winds.

standing on this ledge, the rocks tower skyward on one side of the track
so close as almost to touch the passing train; and on the other is a
sheer precipice of two thousand five hundred feet, where one can stand
on the edge and see, far below, the north fork of the american river,
which looks like a thread of silver laid along the narrow valley, and
sends up a far-away, scarcely perceptible roar, as it rushes and rumbles
along over its rocky bed.  the railroad track is carefully looked after
at this point, and i was able, by turning round and taking the down
grade, to experience the novelty of a short ride, the memory of which
will be ever welcome should one live to be as old as "the oldest
inhabitant." the scenery for the next few miles is glorious; the grand
and imposing mountains are partially covered with stately pines down to
their bases, around which winds the turbulent american river, receiving
on its boisterous march down the mountains tribute from hundreds of
smaller streams and rivulets, which come splashing and dashing out of
the dark caons and crevasses of the mighty hills.

the weather is capricious, and by the time i reach dutch flat, ten miles
east of cape horn, the floodgates of heaven are thrown open again, and
less than an hour succeeds in impressing dutch flat upon my memory as a
place where there is literally "water, water, everywhere, but not a
drop to -;" no, i cannot finish the quotation.  what is the use of lying'.
there is plenty to drink at dutch flat; plenty of everything.

but there is no joke about the water; it is pouring in torrents from
above; the streets are shallow streams; and from scores of ditches and
gullies comes the merry music of swiftly rushing waters, while, to crown
all, scores of monster streams are rushing with a hissing sound from the
mouths of huge pipes or nozzles, and playing against the surrounding
hills; for dutch flat and neighboring camps are the great centre of
hydraulic mining operations in california at the present day.  streams
of water, higher lip the mountains, are taken from their channels and
conducted hither through miles of wooden flumes and iron piping; and
from the mouths of huge nozzles are thrown with tremendous force against
the hills, literally mowing them down.  the rain stops as abruptly as it
began.  the sun shines out clear and warm, and i push ahead once more.

gradually i have been getting up into the snow, and ever and anon a
muffled roar comes booming and echoing over the mountains like the sound
of distant artillery.  it is the sullen noise of monster snow-slides among
the deep, dark caons of the mountains, though a wicked person at gold
run winked at another man and tried to make me believe it was the grizzlies
"going about the mountains like roaring lions, seeking whom they might
devour." the giant voices of nature, the imposing scenery, the gloomy
pine forests which have now taken the place of the gay chaparral, combine
to impress one who, all alone, looks and listens with a realizing sense
of his own littleness.  what a change has come over the whole face of
nature in a few days' travel.  but four days ago i was in the semi-tropical
sacramento valley; now gaunt winter reigns supreme, and the only vegetation
is the hardy pine.

this afternoon i pass a small camp of digger indians, to whom my bicycle
is as much a mystery as was the first locomotive; yet they scarcely turn
their uncovered heads to look; and my cheery greeting of "how," scarce
elicits a grunt and a stare in reply.  long years of chronic hunger and
wretchedness have well-nigh eradicated what little energy these diggers
ever possessed.  the discovery of gold among their native mountains has
been their bane; the only antidote the rude grave beneath the pine and
the happy hunting-grounds beyond.

the next morning finds me briskly trundling through the great, gloomy
snow-sheds that extend with but few breaks for the next forty miles.
when i emerge from them on the other end i shall be over the summit and
well down the eastern slope of the mountains.  these huge sheds have been
built at great expense to protect the track from the vast quantities of
snow that fall every winter on these mountains.  they wind around the
mountain-sides, their roofs built so slanting that the mighty avalanche
of rock and snow that comes thundering down from above glides harmlessly
over, and down the chasm on the other side, while the train glides along
unharmed beneath them.  the section-houses, the water-tanks, stations,
and everything along here are all under the gloomy but friendly shelter
of the great protecting sheds.  fortunately i find the difficulties of
getting through much less than i had been led by rumors to anticipate;
and although no riding can be done in the sheds, i make very good progress,
and trudge merrily along, thankful of a chance to get over the mountains
without having to wait a month or six weeks for the snow outside to
disappear.  at intervals short breaks occur in the sheds, where the track
runs over deep gulch or ravine, and at one of these openings the sinuous
structure can be traced for quite a long distance, winding its tortuous
way around the rugged mountain sides, and through the gloomy pine forest,
all but buried under the snow.  it requires no great effort of the mind
to imagine it to be some wonderful relic of a past civilization, when a
venturesome race of men thus dared to invade these vast wintry solitudes
and burrow their way through the deep snow, like moles burrowing through
the loose earth.  not a living thing is in sight, and the only sounds the
occasional roar of a distant snow-slide, and the mournful sighing of the
breeze as it plays a weird, melancholy dirge through the gently swaying
branches of the tall, sombre pines, whose stately trunks are half buried
in the omnipresent snow.  to-night i stay at the summit hotel, seven
thousand and seventeen feet above the level of the sea.  the "summit"
is nothing if not snowy, and i am told that thirty feet on the level is
no unusual thing up here.  indeed, it looks as if snow-balling on the "
glorious fourth" were no great luxury at the summit house; yet
notwithstanding the decidedly wintry aspect of the sierras, the low
temperature of the rockies farther east is unknown; and although there
is snow to the right, snow to the left, snow all around, and ice under
foot, i travel all through the gloomy sheds in my shirt-sleeves, with
but a gossamer rubber coat thrown over my shoulders to keep off the snow-
water which is constantly melting and dripping through the roof, making
it almost like going through a shower of rain.  often, when it is warm
and balmy outside, it is cold and frosty under the sheds, and the dripping
water, falling among the rocks and timbers, freezes into all manner of
fantastic shapes.  whole menageries of ice animals, birds and all imaginable
objects, are here reproduced in clear crystal ice, while in many places
the ground is covered with an irregular coating of the same, that often
has to be chipped away from the rails.

east of the summit is a succession of short tunnels, the space between
being covered with snow-shed; and when i came through, the openings and
crevices through which the smoke from the engines is wont to make its
escape, and through which a few rays of light penetrate the gloomy
interior, are blocked up with snow, so that it is both dark and smoky;
and groping one's way with a bicycle over the rough surface is anything
but pleasant going.  but there is nothing so bad, it seems, but that it
can get a great deal worse; and before getting far, i hear an approaching
train and forthwith proceed to occupy as small an amount of space as
possible against the side, while three laboriously puffing engines,
tugging a long, heavy freight train up the steep grade, go past.  these
three puffing, smoke-emitting monsters fill every nook and corner of the
tunnel with dense smoke, which creates a darkness by the side of which
the natural darkness of the tunnel is daylight in comparison.  here is a
darkness that can be felt; i have to grope my way forward, inch by inch;
afraid to set my foot down until i have felt the place, for fear of
blundering into a culvert; at the same time never knowing whether there
is room, just where i am, to get out of the way of a train.  a cyclometer
wouldn't have to exert itself much through here to keep tally of the
revolutions; for, besides advancing with extreme caution, i pause every
few steps to listen; as in the oppressive darkness and equally oppressive
silence the senses are so keenly on the alert that the gentle rattle of
the bicycle over the uneven surface seems to make a noise that would
prevent me hearing an approaching train.  this finally comes to am end;
and at the opening in the sheds i climb up into a pine-tree to obtain
a view of donner lake, called the "gem of the sierras." it is a lovely
little lake, and amid the pines, and on its shores occurred one of the
most pathetically tragic events of the old emigrant days.  briefly related
: a small party of emigrants became snowed in while camped at the lake,
and when, toward spring, a rescuing party reached the spot, the last
survivor of the partly, crazed with the fearful suffering he had under-
gone, was sitting on a log, savagely gnawing away at a human arm, the
last remnant of his companions in misery, off whose emaciated carcasses
he had for some time been living!

my road now follows the course of the truckee river down the eastern
slope of the sierras, and across the boundary line into nevada.  the
truckee is a rapid, rollicking stream from one end to the other, and
affords dam-sites and mill-sites without limit.  there is little ridable
road down the truckee caon; but before reaching "verdi, a station a few
miles over the nevada line, i find good road, and ride up and dismount
at the door of the little hotel as coolly as if i had rode without a
dismount all the way from 'frisco.  here at verdi is a camp of washoe
indians, who at once showed their superiority to the diggers by clustering
around and examining; the bicycle with great curiosity.  verdi is less
than forty miles from the summit of the sierras, and from the porch of
the hotel i can see the snow-storm still fiercely raging up in the place
where i stood a few hours ago; yet one can feel that he is already in a
dryer and altogether different climate.  the great masses of clouds,
travelling inward from the coast with their burdens of moisture, like
messengers of peace with presents to a far country, being unable to
surmount the great mountain barrier that towers skyward across their
path, unload their precious cargoes on the mountains; and the parched
plains of nevada open their thirsty mouths in vain.  at verdi i bid good-by
to the golden state and follow the course of the sparkling truckee toward
the forty-mile desert.






chapter ii.





over the deserts of nevada.

gradually i leave the pine-clad slopes of the sierras behind, and every
revolution of my wheel reveals scenes that constantly remind me that i
am in the great "sage-brush state." how appropriate indeed is the name.
sage-brush is the first thing seen on entering nevada, almost the only
vegetation seen while passing through it, and the last thing seen on
leaving it.  clear down to the edge of the rippling waters of the truckee,
on the otherwise barren plain, covering the elevated table-lands, up the
hills, even to the mountain-tops-everywhere, everywhere, nothing but
sagebrush.  in plain view to the right, as i roll on toward reno, are the
mountains on which the world-renowned comstock lode is situated, and
reno was formerly the point from which this celebrated mining-camp was
reached.

before reaching reno i meet a lone washoe indian; he is riding a diminutive,
scraggy-looking mustang.  one of his legs is muffled up in a red blanket,
and in one hand he carries a rudely-invented crutch.  "how will you trade
horses?" i banteringly ask as we meet in the road; and i dismount for
an interview, to find out what kind of indians these washoes are.  to my
friendly chaff he vouchsafes no reply, but simply sits motionless on his
pony, and fixes a regular "injun stare" on the bicycle.  "what's the
matter with your leg?" i persist, pointing at the blanket-be-muffled
member.

"heap sick foot" is the reply, given with the characteristic brevity
of the savage; and, now that the ice of his aboriginal reserve is broken,
he manages to find words enough to ask me for tobacco.  i have no tobacco,
but the ride through the crisp morning air has been productive of a
surplus amount of animal spirits, and i feel like doing something funny;
so i volunteer to cure his " sick foot" by sundry dark and mysterious
manoeuvres, that i unbiushingly intimate are "heap good medicine." with
owlish solemnity my small monkey-wrench is taken from the tool-bag and
waved around the " sick foot" a few times, and the operation is completed
by squirting a few drops from my oil-can through a hole in the blanket.
before going i give him to understand that, in order to have the "good
medicine " operate to his advantage, he will have to soak his copper-colored
hide in a bath every morning for a week, flattering myself that, while
my mystic manoauvres will do him no harm, the latter prescription will
certainly do him good if he acts on it, which, however, is extremely
doubtful.  boiling into reno at 10.30 a.m. the characteristic whiskey-
straight hospitality of the far west at once asserts itself, and one
individual with sporting proclivities invites me to stop over a day or
two and assist him to "paint reno red " at his expense.  leaving reno,
my route leads through the famous truckee meadows - a strip of very good
agricultural land, where plenty of money used to be made by raising
produce for the virginia city market." but there's nothing in it any
more, since the comstock's played out," glumly remarks a ranchman, at
whose place i get dinner.  "i'll take less for my ranch now than i was
offered ten years ago," he continues.

the " meadows" gradually contract, and soon after dinner i find myself
again following the truckee down a narrow space between mountains, whose
volcanic-looking rocks are destitute of all vegetation save stunted sage-
brush.  all down here the road is ridable in patches; but many dismounts
have to be made, and the walking to be done aggregates at least one-third
of the whole distance travelled during the day.  sneakish coyotes prowl
about these mountains, from whence they pay neighborly visits to the
chicken-roosts of the ranchers in the truckee meadows near by.  toward
night a pair of these animals are observed following behind at the
respectful distance of five hundred yards.  one need not be apprehensive
of danger from these contemptible animals, however; they are simply
following behind in a frame of mind similar to that of a hungry school-boy's
when gazing longingly into a confectioner's window.  still, night is
gathering around, and it begins to look as though i will have to pillow
my head on the soft side of a bowlder, and take lodgings on the footsteps
of a bald mountain to-night; and it will scarcely invite sleep to know
that two pairs of sharp, wolfish eyes are peering wistfully through the
darkness at one's prostrate form, and two red tongues are licking about
in hungry anticipation of one's blood.  moreover, these animals have an
unpleasant habit of congregating after night to pay their compliments
to the pale moon, and to hold concerts that would put to shame a whole
regiment of kilkenny cats; though there is but little comparison between
the two, save that one howls and the other yowls, and either is equally
effective in driving away the drowsy goddess.  i try to draw these two
animals within range of my revolver by hiding behind rocks; but they are
too chary of their precious carcasses to take any risks, and the moment
i disappear from their sight behind a rock they are on the alert, and
looking " forty ways at the same time," to make sure that i am not
creeping up on them from some other direction.  fate, however, has decreed
that i am not to sleep out to-night - not quite out.  a lone shanty looms
up through the gathering darkness, and i immediately turn my footsteps
thitherwise.  i find it occupied.  i am all right now for the night.  hold
on, though! not so fast.  "there is many a slip," etc.  the little shanty,
with a few acres of rather rocky ground, on the bank of the truckee, is
presided over by a lonely bachelor of german extraction, who eyes me
with evident suspicion, as, leaning on my bicycle in front of his rude
cabin door i ask to be accommodated for the night.  were it a man on
horseback, or a man with a team, this hermit-like rancher could satisfy
himself to some extent as to the character of his visitor, for he sees
men on horseback or men in wagons, on an average, perhaps, once a week
during the summer, and can see plenty of them any day by going to reno.
but me and the bicycle he cannot "size up" so readily.  he never saw
the like of us before, and we are beyond his teutonic frontier-like
comprehension.  he gives us up; he fails to solve the puzzle; he knows
not how to unravel the mystery; and, with characteristic teutonic
bluntness, he advises us to push on through fifteen miles of rocks, sand,
and darkness, to wadsworth.  the prospect of worrying my way, hungry and
weary, through fifteen miles of rough, unknown country, after dark, looms
up as rather a formidable task.  so summoning my reserve stock of persuasive
eloquence, backed up by sundry significant movements, such as setting
the bicycle up against his cabin-wall, and sitting down on a block of
wood under the window, i finally prevail upon him to accommodate me with
a blanket on the floor of the shanty.  he has just finished supper, and
the remnants of the frugal repast are still on the table; but he says
nothing about any supper for me: he scarcely feels satisfied with himself
yet: he feels that i have, in some mysterious manner, gained an unfair
advantage over him, and obtained a foothold in his shanty against his
own wish-jumped his claim, so to speak.  not that i think the man really
inhospitable at heart; but he has been so habitually alone, away from
his fellowmen so much, that the presence of a stranger in his cabin makes
him feel uneasy; and when that stranger is accompanied by a queer-looking
piece of machinery that cannot stand alone, but which he nevertheless
says he rides on, our lonely rancher is perhaps not so much to be wondered
at, after all, for his absent-mindedness in regard to my supper.  his
mind is occupied with other thoughts.  "you couldn't accommodate a fellow
with a bite to eat, could you." i timidly venture, after devouring what
eatables are in sight, over and over again, with my eyes.  "i have plenty
of money to pay for any accommodation i get," i think it policy to add,
by way of cornering him up and giving him as little chance to refuse as
possible, for i am decidedly hungry, and if money or diplomacy, or both,
will produce supper, i don't propose to go to bed supperless.  i am not
much surprised to see him bear out my faith in his innate hospitality
by apologizing for not thinking of my supper before, and insisting,
against my expressed wishes, on lighting the fire and getting me a warm
meal of fried ham and coffee, for which i beg leave to withdraw any
unfavorable impressions in regard to him which my previous remarks may
possibly have made on the reader's mind.

after supper he thaws out a little, and i wheedle out of him a part of
his history.  he settled on this spot of semi-cultivable land during the
flush times on the comstock, and used to prosper very well by raising
vegetables, with the aid of truckee-river water, and hauling them to the
mining-camps; but the palmy days of the comstock have departed and with
them our lonely rancher's prosperity.  mine host has barely blankets
enough for his own narrow bunk, and it is really an act of generosity
on his part when he takes a blanket off his bed and invites me to extract
what comfort i can get out of it for the night.  snowy mountains are round
about, and curled up on the floor of the shanty, like a kitten under a
stove in mid-winter, i shiver the long hours away, and endeavor to feel
thankful that it is no worse.

for a short distance, next morning, the road is ridable, but nearing
wadsworth it gets sandy, and " sandy," in nevada means deep, loose sand,
in which one sinks almost to his ankles at every step, and where the
possession of a bicycle fails to awaken that degree of enthusiasm that
it does on a smooth, hard road.  at wadsworth i have to bid farewell to
the truckee river, and start across the forty-mile desert, which lies
between the truckee and humboldt rivers.  standing on a sand-hill and
looking eastward across the dreary, desolate waste of sand, rocks, and
alkali, it is with positive regret that i think of leaving the cool,
sparkling stream that has been my almost constant companion for nearly
a hundred miles.  it has always been at hand to quench my thirst or furnish
a refreshing bath.  more than once have i beguiled the tedium of some
uninteresting part of the journey by racing with some trifling object
hurried along on its rippling surface.  i shall miss the murmuring music
of its dancing waters as one would miss the conversation of a companion.

this forty-mile desert is the place that was so much dreaded by the
emigrants en route to the gold-fields of california, there being not a
blade of grass nor drop of water for the whole forty miles; nothing but
a dreary waste of sand and rocks that reflects the heat of the sun, and
renders the desert a veritable furnace in midsummer; and the stock of
the emigrants, worn out by the long journey from the states, would succumb
by the score in crossing.  though much of the trail is totally unfit for
cycling, there are occasional alkali flats that are smooth and hard
enough to play croquet on; and this afternoon, while riding with careless
ease across one of these places, i am struck with the novelty of the
situation.  i am in the midst of the dreariest, deadest-looking country
imaginable.  whirlwinds of sand, looking at a distance like huge columns
of smoke, are wandering erratically over the plains in all directions.
the blazing sun casts, with startling vividness on the smooth white
alkali, that awful scraggy, straggling shadow that, like a vengeful fate,
always accompanies the cycler on a sunny day, and which is the bane of
a sensitive wheelman's life.  the only representative of animated nature
hereabouts is a species of small gray lizard that scuttles over the bare
ground with astonishing rapidity.  not even a bird is seen in the air.
all living things seem instinctively to avoid this dread spot save the
lizard.  a desert forty miles wide is not a particularly large one; but
when one is in the middle of it, it might as well be as extensive as
sahara itself, for anything he can see to the contrary, and away off to
the right i behold as perfect a mirage as one could wish to see.  a person
can scarce help believing his own eyes, and did one not have some knowledge
of these strange and wondrous phenomena, one's orbs of vision would
indeed open with astonishment; for seemingly but a few miles away is a
beautiful lake, whose shores are fringed with wavy foliage, and whose
cool waters seem to lave the burning desert sands at its edge.

a short distance to the right of hot springs station broken clouds of
steam are seen rising from the ground, as though huge caldrons of water
were being heated there.  going to the spot i find, indeed, " caldrons
of boiling water;" but the caldrons are in the depths.  at irregular
openings in the rocky ground the bubbling water wells to the surface,
and the fires-ah! where are the fires.  on another part of this desert
are curious springs that look demure and innocuous enough most of the
time, but occasionally they emit columns of spray and steam.  it is related
of these springs that once a party of emigrants passed by, and one of
the men knelt down to take a drink of the clear, nice-looking water.  at
the instant he leaned over, the spring spurted a quantity of steam and
spray all over him, scaring him nearly out of his wits.  the man sprang
up, and ran as if for his life, frantically beckoning the wagons to move
on, at the same time shouting, at the top of his voice, "drive on! drive
on! hell's no great distance from here!"

>from the forty-mile desert my road leads up the valley of the humboldt
river.  on the shores of humboldt lake are camped a dozen piute lodges,
and i make a half-hour halt to pay them a visit.  i shall never know
whether i am a welcome visitor or not; they show no signs of pleasure
or displeasure as i trundle the bicycle through the sage-brush toward
them.  leaning it familiarly up against one of their teepes, i wander
among them and pry into their domestic affairs like a health-officer in
a new york tenement.  i know i have no right to do this without saying,
"by your leave," but item-hunters the world over do likewise, so i feel
little squeamishness about it.  moreover, when i come back i find the
indians are playing " tit-for-tat" against me.  not only are they curiously
examining the bicycle as a whole, but they have opened the toolbag and
are examining the tools, handing them around among themselves.  i don't
think these piutes are smart or bold enough to steal nowadays; their
intercourse with the whites along the railroad has, in a measure, relieved
them of those aboriginal traits of character that would incite them to
steal a brass button off their pale-faced brother's coat, or screw a nut
off his bicycle; but they have learned to beg; the noble piute of to-day
is an incorrigible mendicant.  gathering up my tools from among them, the
monkey-wrench seems to have found favor in the eyes of a wrinkled-faced
brave, who, it seems, is a chief.  he hands the wrench over with a smile
that is meant to be captivating, and points at it as i am putting it
back into the bag, and grunts, " ugh.  piute likum.  piute likum!" as i
hold it up, and ask him if this is what he means, he again points and
repeats, " piute likum;" and this time two others standing by point at
him and also smile and say, " him big chief; big piute chief, him;"
thinking, no doubt, this latter would be a clincher, and that i would
at once recognize in " big piute chief, him " a vastly superior being
and hand him over the wrench.  in this, however, they are mistaken, for
the wrench i cannot spare; neither can i see any lingering trace of
royalty about him, no kingliness of mien, or extra cleanliness; nor is
there anything winning about his smile - nor any of their smiles for that
matter.  the piute smile seems to me to be simply a cold, passionless
expansion of the vast horizontal slit that reaches almost from one ear
to the other, and separates the upper and lower sections of their
expressionless faces.  even the smiles of the squaws are of the same
unlovely pattern, though they seem to be perfectly oblivious of any
ugliness whatever, and whenever a pale-faced visitor appears near their
teepe they straightway present him with one of those repulsive, unwinning
smiles.  sunday, may 4th, finds me anchored for the day at the village
of lovelocks, on the humboldt river, where i spend quite a remarkable
day.  never before did such a strangely assorted crowd gather to see the
first bicycle ride they ever saw, as the crowd that gathers behind the
station at lovelocks to-day to see me.  there are perhaps one hundred and
fifty people, of whom a hundred are piute and shoshone indians, and the
remainder a mingled company of whites and chinese railroaders; and among
them all it is difficult to say who are the most taken with the novelty
of the exhibition - the red, the yellow, or the white.  later in the evening
i accept the invitation of a piute brave to come out to their camp,
behind the village, and witness rival teams of shoshone and piute squaws
play a match-game of " fi-re-fla," the national game of both the shoshone
and piute tribes.  the principle of the game is similar to polo.  the
squaws are armed with long sticks, with which they endeavor to carry a
shorter one to the goal.  it is a picturesque and novel sight to see the
squaws, dressed in costumes in which the garb of savagery and civilization
is strangely mingled and the many colors of the rainbow are promiscuously
blended, flitting about the field with the agility of a team of professional
polo-players; while the bucks and old squaws, with their pappooses, sit
around and watch the game with unmistakable enthusiasm.  the shoshone
team wins and looks pleased.  here, at lovelocks, i fall in with one of
those strange and seemingly incongruous characters that are occasionally
met with in the west.  he is conversing with a small gathering of piutes
in their own tongue, and i introduce myself by asking him the probable
age of one of the indians, whose wrinkled and leathery countenance would
indicate unusual longevity.  he tells me the indian is probably ninety
years old; but the indians themselves never know their age, as they count
everything by the changes of the moon and the seasons, having no knowledge
whatever of the calendar year.  while talking on this subject, imagine
my surprise to hear my informant - who looks as if the scriptures are the
last thing in the world for him to speak of - volunteer the information
that our venerable and venerated ancestors, the antediluvians, used to
count time in the same way as the indians, and that instead of methuselah
being nine hundred and sixty-nine years of age, it ought to be revised
so as to read " nine hundred and sixty-nine moons," which would bring
that ancient and long-lived person-the oldest man that ever lived-down
to the venerable but by no means extraordinary age of eighty years and
nine months.  this is the first time i have heard this theory, and my
astonishment at hearing it from the lips of a rough-looking habitue of
the nevada plains, seated in the midst of a group of illiterate indians,
can easily be imagined.  on, up the humboldt valley i continue, now riding
over a smooth, alkali flat, and again slavishly trundling through deep
sand, a dozen snowy mountain peaks round about, the humboldt sluggishly
winding its way through the alkali plain; on past eye patch, to the right
of which are more hot springs, and farther on mines of pure sulphur-all
these things, especially the latter, unpleasantly suggestive of a certain
place where the climate is popularly supposed to be uncomfortably warm;
on, past humboldt

station, near which place i wantonly shoot a poor harmless badger, who
peers inquisitively out of his hole as i ride past.  there is something
peculiarly pathetic about the actions of a dying badger, and no sooner
has the thoughtless shot sped on its mission of death than i am sorry
for doing it.

going out of mill city next morning i lose the way, and find myself up
near a small mining camp among the mountains south of the railroad.
thinking to regain the road quickly by going across country through the
sage-brush, i get into a place where that enterprising shrub is go thick
and high that i have to hold the bicycle up overhead to get through.

at three o'clock in the afternoon i come to a railroad section-house.
at the chinese bunk-house i find a lone celestial who, for some reason,
is staying at home.  having had nothing to eat or drink since six o'clock
this morning, i present the chinaman with a smile that is intended to
win his heathen heart over to any gastronomic scheme i may propose; but
smiles are thrown away on john chinaman.

" john, can you fix me up something to eat.  " " no; chinaman no savvy
whi' man eatee; bossee ow on thlack.  chinaman eatee nothing bu' licee
[rice]; no licee cookee." this sounds pretty conclusive; nevertheless i
don't intend to be thus put off so easily.  there is nothing particularly
beautiful about a silver half-dollar, but in the almond-shaped eyes of
the chinaman scenes of paradisiacal loveliness are nothing compared to
the dull surface of a twenty-year-old fifty-cent piece; and the jingle
of the silver coins contains more melody for chin chin's unromantic ear
than a whole musical festival.

" john, i'll give you a couple of two-bit pieces if you'll get me a bite
of something," i persist.  john's small, black eyes twinkle at the
suggestion of two-bit pieces, and his expressive countenance assumes a
commerical air as, with a ludicrous change of front, he replies:

" wha'.  you gib me flore bittee, me gib you bitee eatee.  " "that's what
i said, john; and please be as lively as possible about it."

" all li; you gib me flore bittee me fly you melican plan-cae." " yes,
pancakes will do.  go ahead!"

visions of pancakes and molasses flit before my hunger-distorted vision
as i sit outside until he gets them ready.  in ten minutes john calls me
in.  on a tin plate, that looks as if it has just been rescued from a
barrel of soap-grease, reposes a shapeless mass of substance resembling
putty-it is the " melican plan-cae; " and the celestial triumphantly
sets an empty box in front of it for me to sit on and extends his greasy
palm for the stipulated price.  may the reader never be ravenously hungry
and have to choose between a " melican plan-cae " and nothing.  it is
simply a chunk of tenacious dough, made of flour and water only, and
soaked for a few minutes in warm grease.  i call for molasses; he doesn't
know what it is.  i inquire for syrup, thinking he may recognize my want
by that name.  he brings a jar of thin chinese catsup, that tastes something
like limburger cheese smells.  i immediately beg of him to take it where
its presumably benign influence will fail to reach me.  he produces some
excellent cold tea, however, by the aid of which i manage to "bolt" a
portion of the "plan-cae." one doesn't look for a very elegant spread
for fifty cents in the sage-brush state; but this "melican plan-cae" is
the worst fifty-cent meal i ever heard of.

to-night i stay in winnemucca, the county seat of humboldt county, and
quite a lively little town of 1,200 inhabitants.  "what'll yer have."
is the first word on entering the hotel, and "won't yer take a bottle
of whiskey along." is the last word on leaving it next morning.  there
are piutes and piutes camped at winnemucca, and in the morning i meet a
young brave on horseback a short distance out of town and let him try
his hand with the bicycle.  i wheel him along a few yards and let him
dismount; and then i show him how to mount and invite him to try it
himself.  he gallantly makes the attempt, but springs forward with too
much energy, and over he topples, with the bicycle cavorting around on
top of him.  this satisfies his aboriginal curiosity, and he smiles and
shakes his head when i offer to swap the bicycle for his mustang.  the
road is heavy with sand all along by winnemucca, and but little riding
is to be done.  the river runs through green meadows of rich bottom-land
hereabouts; but the meadows soon disappear as i travel eastward.  twenty
miles east of winnemucca the river arid railroad pass through the caon
in a low range of mountains, while my route lies over the summit.  it is
a steep trundle up the fountains, but from the summit a broad view of
the surrounding country is obtained.  the humboldt river is not a beautiful
stream, and for the greater part of its length it meanders through
alternate stretches of dreary sage-brush plain and low sand-hills, at
long intervals passing through a caon in some barren mountain chain.
but "distance lends enchantment to the view," and from the summit of
the mountain pass even the humboldt looks beautiful.  the sun shines on
its waters, giving it a sheen, and for many a mile its glistening surface
can be seen - winding its serpentine course through the broad, gray-looking
sage and grease-wood plains, while at occasional intervals narrow patches
of green, in striking contrast to the surrounding gray, show where the
hardy mountain grasses venturously endeavor to invade the domains of the
autocratic sagebrush.  what is that queer-looking little reptile, half
lizard, half frog, that scuttles about among the rocks.  it is different
from anything i have yet seen.  around the back of its neck and along its
sides, and, in a less prominent degree, all over its yellowishgray body,
are small, horn-like protuberances that give the little fellow a very
peculiar appearance.  ah, i know who he is.  i have heard of him, and have
seen his picture in books.  i am happy to make his acquaintance.  he is
"prickey," the famed horned toad of nevada.  on this mountain spur, between
the golconda miningcamp and iron point, is the only place i have seen
him on the tour.  he is a very interesting little creature, more lizard
than frog, perfectly harmless; and his little bead-like eyes are bright
and fascinating as the eyes of a rattlesnake.

alkali flats abound, and some splendid riding is to be obtained east of
iron point.  just before darkness closes down over the surrounding area
of plain and mountain i reach stone-house section-house.

" yes, i guess we can get you a bite of something; but it will be cold,"
is the answer vouchsafed in reply to my query about supper.  being more
concerned these days about the quantity of provisions i can command than
the quality, the prospect of a cold supper arouses no ungrateful emotions.
i would rather have a four-pound loaf and a shoulder of mutton for supper
now than a smaller quantity of extra choice viands; and i manage to
satisfy the cravings of my inner man before leaving the table.  but what
about a place to sleep.  for some inexplicable reason these people refuse
to grant me even the shelter of their roof for the night.  they are not
keeping hotel, they say, which is quite true; they have a right to refuse,
even if it is twenty miles to the next place; and they do refuse.  "there's
the empty chinese bunk-house over there.  you can crawl in there,
if you arn't afeerd of ghosts," is the parting remark, as the door closes
and leaves me standing, like an outcast, on the dark, barren plain.

a week ago this bunk-house was occupied by a gang of chinese railroaders,
who got to quarrelling among themselves, and the quarrel wound up in
quite a tragic poisoning affair, that resulted in the death of two, and
nearly killed a third.  the chinese are nothing, if not superstitious,
and since this affair no chinaman would sleep in the bunk-house or work
on this section; consequently the building remains empty.  the "spooks"
of murdered chinese are everything but agreeable company; nevertheless
they are preferable to inhospitable whites, and i walk over to the house
and stretch my weary frame in - for aught i know - the same bunk in which,
but a few days ago, reposed the ghastly corpses of the poisoned celestials.
despite the unsavory memories clinging around the place, and my pillowless
and blanketless couch, i am soon in the land of dreams.  it is scarcely
presumable that one would be blessed with rosy-hued visions of pleasure
under such conditions, however, and near midnight i awake in a cold
shiver.  the snowy mountains rear their white heads up in the silent
night, grim and ghostly all around, and make the midnight air chilly,
even in midsummer.  i lie there, trying in vain to doze off again, for
it grows perceptibly cooler.  at two o'clock i can stand it no longer,
and so get up and strike out for battle mountain, twenty miles ahead.

the moon has risen; it is two-thirds full, and a more beautiful sight
than the one that now greets my exit from the bunk-house it is scarcely
possible to conceive.  only those who have been in this inter-mountain
country can have any idea of a glorious moonlight night in the clear
atmosphere of this dry, elevated region.  it is almost as light as day,
and one can see to ride quite well wherever the road is ridable.  the
pale moon seems to fill the whole broad valley with a flood of soft,
silvery light; the peaks of many snowy mountains loom up white and
spectral; the stilly air is broken by the excited yelping of a pack of
coyotes noisily baying the pale-yellow author of all this loveliness,
and the wild, unearthly scream of an unknown bird or animal coming from
some mysterious, undefinable quarter completes an ideal western picture,
a poem, a dream, that fully compensates for the discomforts of the
preceding hour.  the inspiration of this beautiful scene awakes the
slumbering poesy within, and i am inspired to compose a poem-"moonlight
in the rockies"-that i expect some day to see the world go into raptures
over!


a few miles from the chinese shanty i pass a party of indians camped by
the side of my road.  they are squatting around the smouldering embers
of a sage-brush fire, sleeping and dozing.  i am riding slowly and carefully
along the road that happens to be ridable just here, and am fairly past
them before being seen.  as i gradually vanish in the moonlit air i wonder
what they think it was - that strange-looking object that so silently and
mysteriously glided past.  it is safe to warrant they think me anything
but flesh and blood, as they rouse each other and peer at my shadowy
form disappearing in the dim distance.

>from battle mountain my route leads across a low alkali bottom, through
which dozens of small streams are flowing to the humboldt.  many of them
are narrow enough to be jumped, but not with a bicycle on one's shoulder,
for under such conditions there is always a disagreeable uncertainty
that one may disastrously alight before he gets ready.  but i am getting
tired of partially undressing to ford streams that are little more than
ditches, every little way, and so i hit upon the novel plan of using the
machine for a vaulting-pole.  beaching it out into the centre of the
stream, i place one hand on the head and the other on the saddle, and
vault over, retaining my hold as i alight on the opposite shore.  pulling
the bicycle out after me, the thing is done.  there is no telling to what
uses this two-wheeled "creature" could be put in case of necessity.
certainly the inventor never expected it to be used for a vaulting-pole
in leaping across streams.  twenty-five miles east of battle mountain the
valley of the humboldt widens into a plain of some size, through which
the river meanders with many a horseshoe curve, and maps out the pot-hooks
and hangers of our childhood days in mazy profusion.  amid these innumerable
curves and counter-curves, clumps of willows and tall blue-joint reeds
grow thickly, and afford shelter to thousands of pelicans, that here
make their homes far from the disturbing presence of man.  all unconscious
of impending difficulties, i follow the wagon trail leading through this
valley until i find myself standing on the edge of the river, ruefully
looking around for some avenue by which i can proceed on my way.  i am
in the bend of a horseshoe curve, and the only way to get out is to
retrace my footsteps for several miles, which disagreeable performance
i naturally feel somewhat opposed to doing.  casting about me i discover
a couple of old fence-posts that have floated down from the be-o-wa-we
settlement above and lodged against the bank.  i determine to try and
utilize them in getting the machine across the river, which is not over
thirty yards wide at this point.  swimming across with my clothes first,
i tie the bicycle to the fence-posts, which barely keep it from sinking,
and manage to navigate it successfully across.  the village of be-o-wa-we
is full of cowboys, who are preparing for the annual spring round-up.
whites, indians, and mexicans compose the motley crowd.  they look a
wild lot, with their bear-skin chaparejos and semi-civilized trappings,
galloping to and fro in and about the village.  "i can't spare the time,
or i would," is my slightly un-truthful answer to an invitation to stop
over for the day and have some fun.  briefly told, this latter, with the
cowboy, consists in getting hilariously drunk, and then turning his "pop"
loose at anything that happens to strike his whiskey-bedevilled fancy
as presenting a fitting target.  now a bicycle, above all things, would
intrude itself upon the notice of a cowboy on a " tear" as a peculiar
and conspicuous object, especially if it had a man on it; so after taking
a "smile" with them for good-fellowship, and showing them the modus
operandi of riding the wheel, i consider it wise to push on up the valley.

three miles from be-o-wa-we is seen the celebrated "maiden's grave," on
a low hill or bluff by the road-side; and "thereby hangs a tale." in
early days, a party of emigrants were camped near by at gravelly ford,
waiting for the waters to subside, so that they could cross the liver,
when a young woman of the party sickened and died.  a rudely carved head-
board was set up to mark the spot where she was buried.  years afterward,
when the railroad was being built through here, the men discovered this
rude head-board all alone on the bleak hill-top, and were moved by worthy
sentiment to build a rough stone wall around it to keep off the ghoulish
coyotes; and, later on, the superintendent of the division erected a
large white cross, which now stands in plain view of the railroad.  on
one side of the cross is written the simple inscription, "maiden's
grave;" on the other, her name, "lucinda duncan" leaving the bicycle
by the road-side, i climb the steep bluff and examine the spot with some
curiosity.  there are now twelve other graves beside the original
"maiden's grave," for the people of be-o-wa-we and the surrounding country
have selected this romantic spot on which to inter the remains of their
departed friends.  this afternoon i follow the river through humboldt
caon in preference to taking a long circuitous route over the mountains.
the first noticeable things about this caon are the peculiar water-marks
plainly visible on the walls, high up above where the water could possibly
rise while its present channels of escape exist unobstructed.  it is
thought that the country east of the spur of the red range, which stretches
clear across the valley at be-o-wa-we, and through which the humboldt
seems to have cut its way, was formerly a lake, and that the water
gradually wore a passage-way for itself through the massive barrier,
leaving only the high-water marks on the mountain sides to tell of the
mighty change.  in this caon the rocky walls tower like gigantic
battlements, grim and gloomy on either side, and the seething, boiling
waters of the humboldt - that for once awakens from its characteristic
lethargy, and madly plunges and splutters over a bed of jagged rocks
which seem to have been tossed into its channel by some herculean hand -
fill this mighty "rift" in the mountains with a never-ending roar.  it has
been threatening rain for the last two hours, and now the first peal of
thunder i have heard on the whole journey awakens the echoing voices of
the caon and rolls and rumbles along the great jagged fissure like an
angry monster muttering his mighty wrath.  peal after peal follow each
other in quick succession, the vigorous, newborn echoes of one peal
seeming angrily to chase the receding voices of its predecessor from
cliff to cliff, and from recess to projection, along its rocky, erratic
course up the caon.  vivid flashes of forked lightning shoot athwart the
heavy black cloud that seems to rest on either wall, roofing the caon
with a ceiling of awful grandeur.  sheets of electric flame light up the
dark, shadowy recesses of the towering rocks as they play along the
ridges and hover on the mountain-tops; while large drops of rain begin
to patter down, gradually increasing with the growing fury of their
battling allies above, until a heavy, drenching downpour of rain and
hail compels me to take shelter under an overhanging rock.  at 4 p.m.  i
reach palisade, a railroad village situated in the most romantic spot
imaginable, under the shadows of the towering palisades that hover above
with a sheltering care, as if their special mission were to protect it
from all harm.  evidently these mountains have been rent in twain by an
earthquake, and this great gloomy chasm left open, for one can plainly
see that the two walls represent two halves of what was once a solid
mountain.  curious caves are observed in the face of the cliffs, and one,
more conspicuous than the rest, has been christened "maggie's bower,"
in honor of a beautiful scottish maiden who with her parents once lingered
in a neighboring creek-bottom for some time, recruiting their stock.  but
all is not romance and beauty even in the glorious palisades of the
humboldt; for great, glaring, patent-medicine advertisements are painted
on the most conspicuously beautiful spots of the palisades.  business
enterprise is of course to be commended and encouraged; but it is really
annoying that one cannot let his esthetic soul - that is constantly
yearning for the sublime and beautiful - rest in gladsome reflection on
some beautiful object without at the same time being reminded of " corns,"
and " biliousness," and all the multifarious evils that flesh is heir
to.

it grows pitchy dark ere i leave the caon on my way to carlin.  farther
on, the gorge widens, and thick underbrush intervenes between the road
and the river.  from out the brush i see peering two little round
phosphorescent balls, like two miniature moons, turned in my direction.
i wonder what kind of an animal it is, as i trundle along through the
darkness, revolver in hand, ready to defend myself, should it make an
attack.  i think it is a mountain-lion, as they seem to be plentiful in
this part of nevada, late as it is when i reach carlin, the "boys"
must see how a bicycle is ridden, and, as there is no other place suitable,
i manage to circle around the pool-table in the hotel bar-room a few
times, nearly scalping myself against the bronze chandelier in the
operation.  i hasten, however, to explain that these proceedings took
place immediately after my arrival, lest some worldly wise, over-sagacious
person should be led to suspect them to be the riotous undertakings of
one who had "smiled with the boys once too often." little riding is
possible all through this section of nevada, and, in order to complete
the forty miles a day that i have rigorously imposed upon myself, i
sometimes get up and pull out at daylight.  it is scarce more than sunrise
when, following the railroad through five-mile canon - another rift through
one of the many mountain chains that cross this part of nevada in all
directions under the general name of the humboldt mountains-i meet with
a startling adventure.  i am trundling through the caon alongside the
river, when, rounding the sharp curve of a projecting mountain, a tawny
mountain lion is perceived trotting leisurely along ahead of me, not
over a hundred yards in advance.  he hasn't seen me yet; he is perfectly
oblivious of the fact that he is in "the presence." a person of ordinary
discretion would simply have revealed his presence by a gentlemanly
sneeze, or a slight noise of any kind, when the lion would have immediately
bolted back into the underbrush.  unable to resist the temptation, i fired
at him, and of course missed him, as a person naturally would at a hundred
yards with a bull-dog revolver.  the bullet must have singed him a little
though, for, instead of wildly scooting for the brush, as i anticipated,
he turns savagely round and comes bounding rapidly toward me, and at
twenty paces crouches for a spring.  laying his cat-like head almost on
the ground, his round eyes flashing fire, and his tail angrily waving
to and fro, he looks savage and dangerous.  crouching behind the bicycle,
i fire at him again.  nine times out of ten a person will overshoot the
mark with a revolver under such circumstances, and, being anxious to
avoid this, i do the reverse, and fire too low.  the ball strikes the
ground just in front of his head, and throws the sand and gravel in his
face, and perhaps in his wicked round eyes; for he shakes his head,
springs up, and makes off into the brush.  i shall shed blood of some
sort yet before i leave nevada.  there isn't a day that i don't shoot at
something or other; and all i ask of any animal is to come within two
hundred yards and i will squander a cartridge on him, and i never fail
to hit the ground.

at elko, where i take dinner, i make the acquaintance of an individual,
rejoicing in the sobriquet of "alkali bill," who has the largest and
most comprehensive views of any person i ever met.  he has seen a paragraph,
something about me riding round the world, and he considerately takes
upon himself the task of summing up the few trifling obstacles that i
shall encounter on the way round:

"there is only a small rise at sherman," he rises to explain, " and
another still smaller at the alleghanies; all the balance is downhill
to the atlantic.  of course you'll have to 'boat it' across the frogpond;
then there's europe - mostly level; so is asia, except the himalayas - and
you can soon cross them; then you're all 'hunky,' for there's no mountains
to speak of in china." evidently alkali bill is a person who points the
finger of scorn at small ideas, and leaves the bothersome details of
life to other and smaller-minded folks.  in his vast and glorious imagery
he sees a centaur-like cycler skimming like a frigate-bird across states
and continents, scornfully ignoring sandy deserts and bridgeless streams,
halting for nothing but oceans, and only slowing up a little when he
runs up against a peak that bobs up its twenty thousand feet of snowy
grandeur serenely in his path.  what a ceasar is lost to this benighted
world, because in its blindness, it will not search out such men as
alkali and ask them to lead it onward to deeds of inconceivable greatness.
alkali bill can whittle more chips in an hour than some men could in a
week.  much of the humboldt valley, through which my road now runs, is
at present flooded from the vast quantities of water that are pouring
into it from the ruby range of mountains now visible to the southeast,
and which have the appearance of being the snowiest of any since leaving
the sierras.  only yesterday i threatened to shed blood before i left
nevada, and sure enough my prophecy is destined to speedy fulfilment.
just east of the osino caon, and where the north fork of the humboldt
comes down from the north and joins the main stream, is a stretch of
swampy ground on which swarms of wild ducks and geese are paddling about.
i blaze away at them, and a poor inoffensive gosling is no more.  while
writing my notes this evening, in a room adjoining the "bar" at halleck,
near the united states fort of the same name, i overhear a boozy soldier
modestly informing his comrades that forty-five miles an hour is no
unusual speed to travel with a bicycle.  gradually i am nearing the source
of the humboldt, and at the town of wells i bid it farewell for good.
wells is named from a group of curious springs near the town.  they are
supposed to be extinct volcanoes, now filled with water; and report says
that no sounding-line has yet been found long enough to fathom the bottom.
some day when some poor, unsuspecting tenderfoot is peering inquisitively
down one of these well-like springs, the volcano may suddenly come into
play again and convert the water into steam that will shoot him clear
up into the moon.  these volcanoes may have been soaking in water for
millions of years; but they are not to be trusted on that account; they
can be depended upon to fill some citizen full of lively surprise one
of these days.  everything here is surprising.  you look across the desert
and see flowing water and waving trees; but when you get there, with
your tongue hanging out and your fate wellnigh sealed, you are surprised
to find nothing but sand and rocks.  you climb a mountain expecting to
find trees and birds' eggs, and you are surprised to find high-water
marks and sea-shells.  finally, you look in the looking-glass and are
surprised to find that the wind and exposure have transformed your nice
blonde complexion to a semi-sable hue that would prevent your own mother
from recognizing you.

the next day, when nearing the entrance to moutella pass, over the goose
creek range, i happen to look across the mingled sagebrush and juniper-spruce
brush to the right, and a sight greets my eyes that causes me to
instinctively look around for a tall tree, though well knowing that there
is nothing of the kind for miles; neither is there any ridable road near,
or i might try my hand at breaking the record for a few miles.  standing
bolt upright on their hind legs, by the side of a clump of juniper-spruce
bushes and intently watching my movements, are a pair of full-grown
cinnamon bears.  when a bear sees a man before the man happens to descry
him, and fails to betake himself off immediately, it signifies that he
is either spoiling for a fight or doesn't care a continental password
whether war is declared or not.  moreover, animals recognize the peculiar
advantages of two to one in a fight equally with their human infer! - superiors;
and those two over there are apparently in no particular hurry to move
on.  they don't seem awed at my presence.  on the contrary, they look
suspiciously like being undecided and hesitative about whether to let
me proceed peacefully on my way or not.  their behavior is outrageous;
they stare and stare and stare, and look quite ready for a fight.  i don't
intend one to come off, though, if i can avoid it.  i prefer to have it
settled by arbitration.  i haven't lost these bears; they aren't mine,
and i don't want anything that doesn't belong to me.  i am not covetous;
so, lest i should be tempted to shoot at them if i come within the
regulation two hundred yards, i "edge off" a few hundred yards in the
other direction, and soon have the intense satisfaction of seeing them
stroll off toward the mountains.  i wonder if i don't owe my escape on
this occasion to my bicycle.  do the bright spokes glistening in the
sunlight as they revolve make an impression on their bearish intellects
that influences their decision in favor of a retreat.  it is perhaps
needless to add that, all through this mountain-pass, i keep a loose eye
busily employed looking out for bears.

but nothing more of a bearish nature occurs, and the early gloaming finds
me at tacoma, a village near the utah boundary line.  there is an awful
calamity of some sort hovering over this village.  one can feel it in the
air.  the habitues of the hotel barroom sit around, listless and glum.
when they speak at all it is to predict all sorts of difficulties for
me in my progress through utah and wyoming territories.  "the black gnats
of the salt lake mud flat'll eat you clean up," snarls one.  "bear river's
flooding the hull kintry up weber caon way," growls another.  "the
slickest thing you kin do, stranger, is to board the keers and git out
of this," says a third, in a tone of voice and with an emphasis that
plainly indicates his great disgust at "this." by " this" he means the
village of tacoma; and he is disgusted with it.  they are all disgusted
with it and with the whole world this evening, because tacoma is "out
of whiskey." yes, the village is destitute of whiskey; it should have
arrived yesterday, and hasn't shown up yet; and the effect on the society
of the bar-room is so depressing that i soon retire to my couch, to dream
of utah's strange intermingling of forbidding deserts and beautiful
orchards through which my route now leads me.






chapter iii.





through  mormon-land and over  the  rockies.

a dreary-looking country is the " great american desert," in utah, the
northern boundary line of which i traverse next morning.  to the left
of the road is a low chain of barren hills; to the right, the uninviting
plain, over which one's eye wanders in vain for some green object that
might raise hopes of a less desolate region beyond; and over all hangs
an oppressive silence - the silence of a dead country - a country destitute
of both animal and vegetable life.  over the great desert hangs a smoky
haze, out of which pilot peak, thirty-eight miles away, rears its conical
head 2,500 feet above the level plain at its base.

some riding is obtained at intervals along this unattractive stretch of
country, but there are no continuously ridable stretches, and the principal
incentive to mount at all is a feeling of disgust at so much compulsory
walking.  a noticeable feature through the desert is the almost unquenchable
thirst that the dry saline air inflicts upon one.  reaching a railway
section-house, i find no one at home; but there is a small underground
cistern of imported water, in which "wrigglers " innumerable wriggle,
but which is otherwise good and cool.  there is nothing to drink out of,
and the water is three feet from the surface; while leaning down to try
and drink, the wooden framework at the top gives way and precipitates
me head first into the water.  luckily, the tank is large enough to enable
me to turn round and reappear at the surface, head first, and with
considerable difficulty i scramble out again, with, of course, not a dry
thread on me.

at three in the afternoon i roll into terrace, a small mormon town.  here
a rather tough-looking citizen, noticing that my garments are damp,
suggests that 'cycling must be hard work to make a person perspire like
that in this dry climate.  at the matlin section-house i find accommodation
for the night with a whole-souled section-house foreman, who is keeping
bachelor's hall temporarily, as his wife is away on a visit at ogden.
>from this house, which is situated on the table-land of the bed dome
mountains, can be obtained a more comprehensive view of the great american
desert than when we last beheld it.  it has all the appearance of being
the dry bed of an ancient salt lake or inland sea.  a broad, level plain
of white alkali, which is easily mistaken in the dim distance for smooth,
still water, stretches away like a dead, motionless sea as far as human
vision can penetrate, until lost in the haze; while, here and there,
isolated rocks lift their rugged heads above the dreary level, like
islets out of the sea.  it is said there are many evidences that go to
prove this desert to have once been covered by the waters of the great
inland sea that still, in places, laves its eastern borders with its
briny flood.  i am informed there are many miles of smooth, hard, salt-flats,
over which a 'cycler could skim like a bird; but i scarcely think enough
of bird-like skimming to go searching for it on the american desert.  a
few miles east of matlin the road leads over a spur of the red dome
range, from whence i obtain my first view of the great salt lake, and
soon i am enjoying a long-anticipated bath in its briny waters.  it is
disagreeably cold, but otherwise an enjoyable bath.  one can scarce sink
beneath the surface, so strongly is the water impregnated with salt.  for
dinner, i reach kelton, a town that formerly prospered as the point from
which vast quantities of freight were shipped to idaho.  scores of huge
freight-wagons are now bunched up in the corrals, having outlived their
usefulness since the innovation from mules and "overland ships " to
locomotives on the utah northern railway.  empty stores and a general air
of vanished prosperity are the main features of kelton to-day; and the
inhabitants seem to reflect in their persons the aspect of the town;
most of them being freighters, who, finding their occupation gone, hang
listlessly around, as though conscious of being fit for nothing else.
>from kelton i follow the lake shore, and at six in the afternoon arrive
at the salt-works, near monument station, and apply for accommodation,
which is readily given.  here is erected a wind-mill, which pumps the
water from the lake into shallow reservoirs, where it evaporates and
leaves a layer of coarse salt on the bottom.  these people drink water
that is disagreeably brackish and unsatisfactory to one unaccustomed to
it, but which they say has become more acceptable to them, from habitual
use, than purely fresh water.  this spot, is the healthiest and most
favorable for the prolific production of certain forms of insect life i
ever was in, and i spend the liveliest night here i ever spent anywhere.
these people professed to give me a bed to myself, but no sooner have i
laid my head on the pillow than i recognize the ghastly joke they are
playing on me.  the bed is already densely populated with guests, who
naturally object to being ousted or overcrowded.  they seem quite a
kittenish and playful lot, rather inclined to accomplish their ends by
playing wild pranks than by resorting to more austere measures.  watching
till i have closed my eyes in an attempt to doze off, they slip up and
playfully tickle me under the chin, or scramble around in my ear, and
anon they wildly chase each other up and down my back, and play leap-frog
and hide-and-go-seek all over my sensitive form, so that i arise in the
morning anything but refreshed from my experience.

still following the shores of the lake, for several miles, my road now
leads over the northern spur of the promontory mountains.  on these hills
i find a few miles of hard gravel that affords the best riding i have
experienced in utah, and i speed along as rapidly as possible, for dark,
threatening clouds are gathering overhead.  but ere i reach the summit
of the ridge a violent thunder-storm breaks over the hills, and i seem
to be verily hobnobbing with the thunder and lightning, that appears to
be round about me, rather than overhead.  a troop of wild bronchos,
startled and stampeded by the vivid lightning and sharp peals of thunder,
come wildly charging down the mountain trail, threatening to run quite
over me in their mad career.  pulling my six-shooter, i fire a couple of
shots in the air to attract their attention, when they rapidly swerve
to the left, and go tearing frantically over the rolling hills on their
wild flight to the plains below.

most of the rain falls on the plain and in the lake, and when i arrive
at the summit i pause to take a view at the lake and surrounding country.
a more auspicious occasion could scarcely have been presented.  the storm
has subsided, and far beneath my feet a magnificent rainbow spans the
plain, and dips one end of its variegated beauty in the sky-blue waters
of the lake.  from this point the view to the west and south is truly
grand-rugged, irregular mountain-chains traverse the country at every
conceivable angle, and around among them winds the lake, filling with
its blue waters the intervening spaces, and reflecting, impartially
alike, their grand majestic beauty and their faults.  what dreams of
empire and white-winged commerce on this inland sea must fill the mind
and fire the imagery of the newly arrived mormon convert who, standing
on the commanding summit of these mountains, feasts his eyes on the
glorious panorama of blue water and rugged mountains that is spread like
a wondrous picture before him.  surely, if he be devotionally inclined,
it fails not to recall to his mind another inland sea in far-off asia
minor, on whose pebbly shores and by whose rippling waves the cradle of
an older religion than morrnonism was rocked - but not rocked to sleep.

ten miles farther on, from the vantage-ground of a pass over another
spur of the same range, is obtained a widely extended view of the country
to the east.  for nearly thirty miles from the base of the mountains,
low, level mud-flats extend eastward, bordered on the south by the marshy,
sinuous shores of the lake, and on the north by the blue creek mountains.
thirty miles to the east - looking from this distance strangely like flocks
of sheep grazing at the base of the mountains - can be seen the white-
painted houses of the mormon settlements, that thickly dot the narrow
but fertile strip of agricultural land, between bear river and the mighty
wahsatch mountains, that, rearing their snowy crest skyward, shut out
all view of what lies beyond.  from this height the level mud-flats appear
as if one could mount his wheel and bowl across at a ten-mile pace; but
i shall be agreeably surprised if i am able to aggregate ten miles of
riding out of the thirty.  immediately after getting down into the bottom
i make the acquaintance of the tiny black gnats that one of our whiskey-
bereaved friends at tacoma had warned me against.  one's head is constantly
enveloped in a black cloud of these little wretches.  they are of
infinitesimal proportions, and get into a person's ears, eyes, and
nostrils, and if one so far forgets himself as to open his mouth, they
swarm in as though they think it the "pearly gates ajar," and this their
last chance of effecting an entrance.  mingled with them, and apparently
on the best of terms, are swarms of mosquitoes, which appear perfect
jumbos in comparison with their disreputable associates.

as if partially to recompense me for the torments of the afternoon, dame
fortune considerately provides me with two separate and distinct suppers
this evening.  i had intended, when i left promontory station, to reach
corinne for the night; consequently i bring a lunch with me, knowing it
will take me till late to reach there.  these days, i am troubled with
an appetite that makes me blush to speak of it, and about five o'clock
i sit down - on the bleached skeleton of a defunct mosquito! - and proceed
to eat my lunch of bread and meat - and gnats; for i am quite certain of
eating hundreds of these omnipresent creatures at every bite i take.  two
hours afterward i am passing quarry section-house, when the foreman
beckons me over and generously invites me to remain over night.  he brings
out canned oysters and bottles of milwaukee beer, and insists on my
helping him discuss these acceptable viands; to which invitation it is
needless to say i yield without extraordinary pressure, the fact of
having eaten two hours before being no obstacle whatever.  so much for
'cycling as an aid to digestion.  arriving at corinne, on bear river, at
ten o'clock next morning, i am accosted by a bearded, patriarchal mormon,
who requests me to constitute myself a parade of one, and ride the bicycle
around the town for the edification of the people's minds.

" in course they knows what a ' perlocefede' is, from seein' 'em in
picturs; but they never seed a real machine, and it'd be a 'hefty' treat
fer 'em,"is the eloquent appeal made by this person in behalf of the
corinnethians, over whose destinies and happiness he appears to preside
with fatherly solicitude.  as the streets of corinne this morning consist
entirely of black mud of uncertain depth, i am reluctantly compelled to
say the elder nay, at the same time promising him that if he would have
them in better condition next time i happened around, i would willingly
second his brilliant idea of making the people happy by permitting them
a glimpse of my " perlocefede " in action.

after crossing bear river i find myself on a somewhat superior road
leading through the mormon settlements to ogden.  no greater contrast can
well be imagined than that presented by this strip of country lying
between the lake and the "wahsatch mountains, and the desert country to
the westward.  one can almost fancy himself suddenly transported by some
good genii to a quiet farming community in an eastern state.  instead of
untamed bronchos and wild-eyed cattle, roaming at their own free will
over unlimited territory, are seen staid work-horses ploughing in the
field, and the sleek milch-cow peacefully cropping tame grass in enclosed
meadows.  birds are singing merrily in the willow hedges and the shade-trees;
green fields of alfalfa and ripening grain line the road and spread
themselves over the surrounding country in alternate squares, like those
of a vast checker-board.  farms, on the average, are small, and, consequently,
houses are thick; and not a farm-house among them all but is embowered
in an orchard of fruit and shade-trees that mingle their green leaves
and white blossoms harmoniously.  at noon i roll into a forest of fruit-
trees, among which, i am informed, willard city is situated; but one can
see nothing of any city.  nothing but thickets of peach, plum, and apple
trees, all in full bloom, surround the spot where i alight and begin to
look around for some indications of the city.  "where is willard city.  "
i inquire of a boy who comes out from one of the orchards carrying a can
of kerosene in his hand, suggestive of having just come from a grocery,
and so he has.  " this is willard city, right here," replies the boy; and
then, in response to my inquiry for the hotel, he points to a small gate
leading into an orchard, and tells me the hotel is in there.

the hote l -like every other house and store here - is embowered amid an
orchard of blooming fruit-trees, and looks like anything but a public
eating-house.  no sign up, nothing to distinguish it from a private
dwelling; and i am ushered into a nicely furnished parlor, on the neatly
papered walls of which hang enlarged portraits of brigham young and other
mormon celebrities, while a large-sized mormon bible, expensively bound
in morocco, reposes on the centre-table.  a charming miss of -teen summers
presides over a private table, on which is spread for my material benefit
the finest meal i have eaten since leaving california.  such snow-white
bread.  such delicious butter.  and the exquisite flavor of "spiced peach-
butter" lingers in my fancy even now; and as if this were not enough
for "two bits" (a fifty per cent, come-down from usual rates in the
mountains), a splendid bouquet of flowers is set on the table to round
off the repast with their grateful perfume.  as i enjoy the wholesome,
substantial food, i fall to musing on the mighty chasm that intervenes
between the elegant meal now before me and the "melican plan-cae " of
two weeks ago.  "you have a remarkably pleasant country here, miss," i
venture to remark to the young lady who has presided over my table, and
whom i judge to be the daughter of the house, as she comes to the door
to see the bicycle.

"yes; we have made it pleasant by planting so many orchards," she
answers, demurely.

"i should think the mormons ought to be contented, for they possess the
only good piece of farming country between california and 'the states,'"
i blunderingly continued.

"i never heard anyone say they are not contented, but their enemies,"
replies this fair and valiant champion of mormonism in a voice that shows
she quite misunderstands my meaning.  "what i intended to say was, that
the mormon people are to be highly congratulated on their good sense in
settling here," i hasten to explain; for were i to leave at this house,
where my treatment has been so gratifying, a shadow of prejudice against
the mormons, i should feel like kicking myself all over the territory.
the women of the mormon religion are instructed by the wiseacres of the
church to win over strangers by kind treatment and by the charm of their
conversation and graces; and this young lady has learned the lesson well;
she has graduated with high honors.  coming from the barren deserts of
nevada and western utah - from the land where the irreverent and irrepressible
"old timer" fills the air with a sulphurous odor from his profanity
and where nature is seen in its sternest aspect, and then suddenly finding
one's self literally surrounded by flowers and conversing with beauty
about religion, is enough to charm the heart of a marble statue.  ogden
is reached for supper, where i quite expect to find a 'cycler or two
(ogden being a city of eight thousand inhabitants); but the nearest
approach to a bicycler in ogden is a gentleman who used to belong to a
chicago club, but who has failed to bring his "wagon" west with him.
twelve miles of alternate riding and walking eastwardly from ogden bring
me to the entrance of weber canon, through which the weber river, the
union pacific railroad, and an uncertain wagon-trail make their way
through the wahsatch mountains on to the elevated table-lands of wyoming
territory.  objects of interest follow each other in quick succession
along this part of the journey, and i have ample time to examine them,
for weber river is flooding the canon, and in many places has washed
away the narrow space along which wagons are wont to make their way, so
that i have to trundle slowly along the railway track.  now the road turns
to the left, and in a few minutes the rugged and picturesque walls of
the canon are towering in imposing heights toward the clouds.  the weber
river comes rushing - a resistless torrent - from under the dusky shadows
of the mountains through which it runs for over fifty miles, and onward
to the pkin below, where it assumes a more moderate pace, as if conscious
that it has at last escaped from the hurrying turmoil of its boisterous
march down the mountain.

advancing into the yawning jaws of the range, a continuously resounding
roar is heard in advance, which gradually becomes louder as i proceed
eastward; in a short time the source of the noise is discovered, and a
weird scene greets my enraptured vision.  at a place where the fall is
tremendous, the waters are opposed in their mad march by a rough-and-tumble
collection of huge, jagged rocks, that have at some time detached
themselves from the walls above, and come crashing down into the bed of
the stream.  the rushing waters, coming with haste from above, appear to
pounce with insane fury on the rocks that dare thus to obstruct their
path; and then for the next few moments all is a hissing, seething,
roaring caldron of strife, the mad waters seeming to pounce with ever-
increasing fury from one imperturbable antagonist to another, now leaping
clear over the head of one, only to dash itself into a cloud of spray
against another, or pour like a cataract against its base in a persistent,
endless struggle to undermine it; while over all tower the dark, shadowy
rocks, grim witnesses of the battle.  this spot is known by the appropriate
name of "the devil's gate." wherever the walls of the canon recede from
the river's brink, and leave a space of cultivable land, there the
industrious mormons have built log or adobe cabins, and converted the
circumscribed domain into farms, gardens, and orchards.  in one of these
isolated settlements i seek shelter from a passing shower at the house
of a "three-ply mormon " (a mormon with three wives), and am introduced
to his three separate and distinct better-halves; or, rather, one should
say, " better-quarters," for how can anything have three halves.  a
noticeable feature at all these farms is the universal plurality of women
around the house, and sometimes in the field.  a familiar scene in any
farming community is a woman out in the field, visiting her husband, or,
perchance, assisting him in his labors.  the same thing is observable at
the mormon settlements along the weber river - only, instead of one woman,
there are generally two or three, and perhaps yet another standing in
the door of the house.  passing through two tunnels that burrow through
rocky spurs stretching across the canon, as though to obstruct farther
progress, across the river, to the right, is the "devil's slide" - two
perpendicular walls of rock, looking strangely like man's handiwork,
stretching in parallel lines almost from base to summit of a sloping,
grass-covered mountain.  the walls are but a dozen feet apart.  it is a
curious phenomenon, but only one among many that are scattered at intervals
all through here.  a short distance farther, and i pass the famous
"thousand-mile tree" - a rugged pine, that stands between the railroad and
the river, and which has won renown by springing up just one thousand
miles from omaha.  this tree is having a tough struggle for its life these
days; one side of its honored trunk is smitten as with the leprosy.  the
fate of the thousand-mile tree is plainly sealed.  it is unfortunate in
being the most conspicuous target on the line for the fe-ro-ci-ous youth
who comes west with a revolver in his pocket and shoots at things from
the car-window.  judging from the amount of cold lead contained in that
side of its venerable trunk next the railway few of these thoughtless
marksmen go past without honoring it with a shot.  emerging from "the
narrows" of weber canon, the route follows across a less contracted
space to echo city, a place of two hundred and twenty-five inhabitants,
mostly mormons, where i remain over-night.  the hotel where i put up at
echo is all that can be desired, so far as "provender" is concerned;
but the handsome and picturesque proprietor seems afflicted with sundry
eccentric habits, his leading eccentricity being a haughty contempt for
fractional currency.  not having had the opportunity to test him, it is
difficult to say whether this peculiarity works both ways, or only when
the change is due his transient guests.  however, we willingly give him
the benefit of the doubt.

heavily freighted rain-clouds are hovering over the mountains next morning
and adding to the gloominess of the gorge, which, just east of echo city,
contracts again and proceeds eastward under the name of echo gorge.
turning around a bold rocky projection to the left, the far-famed
"pulpit rock" towers above, on which brigham young is reported to have
stood and preached to the mormon host while halting over sunday at this
point, during their pilgrimage to their new home in the salt lake valley
below.  had the redoubtable prophet turned "dizzy " while haranguing his
followers from the elevated pinnacle of his novel pulpit, he would at
least have died a more romantic death than he is accredited with - from
eating too much green corn.

fourteen miles farther brings me to "castle rocks," a name given to the
high sandstone bluffs that compose the left-hand side of the canon at
this point, and which have been worn by the elements into all manner of
fantastic shapes, many of them calling to mind the towers and turrets
of some old-world castle so vividly, that one needs but the pomp and
circumstance of old knight-errant days to complete the illusion.  but,
as one gazes with admiration on these towering buttresses of nature, it
is easy to realize that the most massive and imposing feudal castle, or
ramparts built with human hands, would look like children's toys beside
them.  the weather is cool and bracing, and when, in the middle of the
afternoon, i reach evanston, wyo. terr., too late to get dinner at the
hotel, i proceed to devour the contents of a bakery, filling the proprietor
with boundless astonishment by consuming about two-thirds of his stock.
when i get through eating, he bluntly refuses to charge anything,
considering himself well repaid by having witnessed the most extraordinary
gastronomic feat on record - the swallowing of two-thirds of a bakery.
following the trail down yellow creek, i arrive at hilliard after dark.
the hilliardites are "somewhat seldom," but they are made of the right
material.  the boarding-house landlady sets about preparing me supper,
late though it be; and the "boys" extend me a hearty invitation to turn
in with them for the night.  here at hilliard is a long v-shaped flume,
thirty miles long, in which telegraph poles, ties, and cord wood are
floated down to the railroad from the pineries of the uintah mountains,
now plainly visible to the south.  the "boys" above referred to are men
engaged in handling ties thus floated down; and sitting around the red-hot
stove, they make the evening jolly with songs and yarns of tie-drives,
and of wild rides down the long "v" flume.  a happy, light-hearted set
of fellows are these "tie-men," and not an evening but their rude shanty
resounds with merriment galore.  fun is in the air to-night, and "beaver"
(so dubbed on account of an unfortunate tendency to fall into every
hole of water he goes anywhere near) is the unlucky wight upon whom the
rude witticisms concentrate; for he has fallen into the water again to-
day, and is busily engaged in drying his clothes by the stove.  they
accuse him of keeping up an uncomfortably hot fire, detrimental to
everybody's comfort but his own, and threaten him with dire penalties
if he doesn't let the room cool off; also broadly hinting their disapproval
of his over-fondness for "adam's ale," and threaten to make him "set
'em up" every time he tumbles in hereafter.  in revenge for these remarks,
"beaver" piles more wood into the stove, and, with many a westernism
- not permitted in print - threatens to keep up a fire that will drive them
all out of the shanty if they persist in their persecutions.  crossing
next day the low, broad pass over the uintah mountains, some stretches
of ridable surface are passed over, and at this point i see the first
band of antelope on the tour; but as they fail to come within the
regulation two hundred yards they are graciously permitted to live.

at piedmont station i decide to go around by way of port bridger and
strike the direct trail again at carter station, twentyfour miles farther
east.

a tough bit of country.  the next day at noon finds me "tucked in my
little bed" at carter, decidedly the worse for wear, having experienced
the toughest twenty-four hours of the entire journey.  i have to ford no
less than nine streams of ice-cold water; get benighted on a rain-soaked
adobe plain, where i have to sleep out all night in an abandoned freight-
wagon; and, after carrying the bicycle across seven miles of deep, sticky
clay, i finally arrive at carter, looking like the last sad remnant of
a dire calamity - having had nothing to eat for twenty-four hours.  from
carter my route leads through the bad-lands, amid buttes of mingled clay
and rock, which the elements have worn into all conceivable shapes, and
conspicuous among them can be seen, to the south, "church buttes," so
called from having been chiselled by the dexterous hand of nature into
a group of domes and pinnacles, that, from a distance, strikingly resembles
some magnificent cathedral.  high-water marks are observable on these
buttes, showing that noah's flood, or some other aqueous calamity once
happened around here; and one can easily imagine droves of miserable,
half-clad indians, perched on top, looking with doleful, melancholy
expression on the surrounding wilderness of waters.  arriving at granger,
for dinner, i find at the hotel a crest-fallen state of affairs somewhat
similar to the glumness of tacoma.  tacoma had plenty of customers, but
no whiskey; granger on the contrary has plenty of whiskey, but no
customers.  the effect on that marvellous, intangible something, the
saloon proprietor's intellect, is the same at both places.  here is plainly
a new field of research for some ambitious student of psychology.  whiskey
without customers.  customers without whiskey.  truly all is vanity and
vexation of spirit.

next day i pass the world-renowned castellated rocks of green river, and
stop for the night at rock springs, where the union pacific railway
company has extensive coal mines.  on calling for my bill at the hotel
here, next morning, the proprietor - a corpulent teuton, whose thoughts,
words, and actions, run entirely to beer - replies, "twenty-five cents a
quart." thinking my hearing apparatus is at fault, i inquire again.
"twenty-five cents a quart and vurnish yer own gan." the bill is abnormally
large, but, as i hand over the amount, a "loaded schooner" is shoved
under my nose, as though a glass of beer were a tranquillizing antidote
for all the ills of life.  splendid level alkali flats abound east of
rock springs, and i bowl across them at a lively pace until they terminate,
and my route follows up bitter creek, where the surface is just the
reverse; being seamed and furrowed as if it had just emerged from a
devastating flood.  it is said that the teamster who successfully navigated
the route up bitter creek, considered himself entitled to be called "a
tough cuss from bitter creek, on wheels, with a perfect education." a
justifiable regard for individual rights would seem to favor my own
assumption of this distinguished title after traversing the route with
a bicycle.  ten o'clock next morning finds me leaning on my wheel, surveying
the scenery from the "continental divide" - the backbone of the continent.
pacing the north, all waters at my right hand flow to the east, and all
on my left flow to the west - the one eventually finding their way to the
atlantic, the other to the pacific.  this spot is a broad low pass through
the rockies, more plain than mountain, but from which a most commanding
view of numerous mountain chains are obtained.  to the north and northwest
are the seminole, wind river, and sweet-water ranges - bold, rugged mountain-
chains, filling the landscape of the distant north with a mass of great,
jagged, rocky piles, grand beyond conception; their many snowy peaks
peopling the blue ethery space above with ghostly, spectral forms well
calculated to inspire with feelings of awe and admiration a lone cycler,
who, standing in silence and solitude profound on the great continental
divide, looks and meditates on what he sees.  other hoary monarchs are
visible to the east, which, however, we shall get acquainted with later
on.  down grade is the rule now, and were there a good road, what an
enjoyable coast it would be, down from the continental divide! but half
of it has to be walked.  about eighteen miles from the divide i am greatly
amused, and not a little astonished, at the strange actions of a coyote
that comes trotting in a leisurely, confidential way toward me; and when
he reaches a spot commanding a good view of my road he stops and watches
my movements with an air of the greatest inquisitiveness and assurance.
he stands and gazes as i trundle along, not over fifty yards away, and
he looks so much like a well-fed collie, that i actually feel like patting
my knee for him to come and make friends.  shoot at him .  certainly not.
one never abuses a confidence like that.  he can come and rub his sleek
coat up against the bicycle if he likes, and - blood-thirsty rascal though
he no doubt is - i will never fire at him.  he has as much right to gaze
in astonishment at a bicycle as anybody else who never saw one before.

staying over night and the next day at rawlins, i make the sixteen miles
to port fred steele next morning before breakfast, there bein" a very
good road between the two places.  this fort stands on the west bank of
north platte river, and a few miles west of the river i ride through the
first prairie dog town encountered in crossing the continent from the
west, though i shall see plenty of these interesting little fellows
during the next three hundred miles.  these animals sit near their holes
and excitedly bark at whatever goes past.  never before have they had an
opportunity to bark at a bicycle, and they seem to be making the most
of their opportunity.  i see at this village none of the small speckled
owls, which, with the rattlesnake, make themselves so much at home in
the prairie-dogs' comfortable quarters, but i see them farther east.
these three strangely assorted companions may have warm affections toward
each other; but one is inclined to think the great bond of sympathy that
binds them together is the tender regard entertained by the owl and the
rattlesnake for the nice, tender young prairie-pups that appear at
intervals to increase the joys and cares of the elder animals.

i am now getting on to the famous laramie plains, and elk mountain looms
up not over ten miles to the south - a solid, towery mass of black rocks
and dark pine forests, that stands out bold and distinct from surrounding
mountain chains as though some animate thing conscious of its own strength
and superiority.  a snow-storm is raging on its upper slopes, obscuring
that portion of the mountain; but the dark forest-clad slopes near the
base are in plain view, and also the rugged peak which elevates its white
crowned head above the storm, and reposes peacefully in the bright
sunlight in striking contrast to the warring elements lower down.  i have
heard old hunters assert that this famous "landmark of the rockies"
is hollow, and that they have heard wolves howling inside the mountain;
but some of these old western hunters see and hear strange things!

as i penetrate the laramie plains the persistent sage-brush, that has
constantly hovered around my path for the last thousand miles, grows
beautifully less, and the short, nutritious buffalo-grass is creeping
everywhere.  in carbon, where i arrive after dark, i mention among other
things in reply to the usual volley of questions, the fact of having to
foot it so great a proportion of the way through the mountain country;
and shortly afterward, from among a group of men, i hear a voice, thick
and husky with "valley tan," remark: " faith, oi cud roide a bicycle
meself across the counthry av yeez ud lit me walluk it afut!" and
straightway a luminous bunch of shamrocks dangled for a brief moment in
the air, and then vanished.  after passing medicine bow valley and como
lake i find some good ridable road, the surface being hard gravel and
the plains high and dry.  reaching the brow of one of those rocky ridges
that hereabouts divide the plains into so many shallow basins, i find
myself suddenly within a few paces of a small herd of antelope peacefully
grazing on the other side of the narrow ridge, all unconscious of the
presence of one of creation's alleged proud lords.  my ever-handy revolver
rings out clear and sharp on the mountain air, and the startled antelope
go bounding across the plain in a succession of quick, jerky jumps
peculiar to that nimble animal; but ere they have travelled a hundred
yards one of them lags behind and finally staggers and lays down on the
grass.  as i approach him he makes a gallant struggle to rise and make
off after his companions, but the effort is too much for him, and coming
up to him, i quickly put him out of pain by a shot behind the ear.  this
makes a proud addition to my hitherto rather small list of game, which
now comprises jack-rabbits, a badger, a fierce gosling, an antelope, and
a thin, attenuated coyote, that i bowled over in utah.

>from this ridge an extensive view of the broad, billowy plains and
surrounding mountains is obtained.  elk mountain still seems close at
hand, its towering form marking the western limits of the medicine bow
range whose dark pine-clad slopes form the western border of the plains.
back of them to the west is the snowy range, towering in ghostly grandeur
as far above the timber-clad summits of the medicine bow range as these
latter are above the grassy plains at their base.  to the south more snowy
mountains stand out against the sky like white tracery on a blue ground,
with long's peak and fremont's peak towering head and shoulders above
them all.  the rattlesnake range, with laramie peak rearing its ten
thousand feet of rugged grandeur to the clouds, are visible to the north.
on the east is the black hills range, the last chain of the rockies, and
now the only barrier intervening between me and the broad prairies that
roll away eastward to the missouri river and "the states."

a genuine laramie plains rain-storm is hovering overhead as i pull out
of rock creek, after dinner, and in a little while the performance begins.
there is nothing of the gentle pattering shower about a rain and wind
storm on these elevated plains; it comes on with a blow and a bluster
that threatens to take one off his feet.  the rain is dashed about in the
air by the wild, blustering wind, and comes from all directions at the
same time.  while you are frantically hanging on to your hat, the wind
playfully unbuttons your rubber coat and lifts it up over your head and
flaps the wet, muddy corners about in your face and eyes; and, ere you
can disentangle your features from the cold uncomfortable embrace of the
wet mackintosh, the rain - which "falls" upward as well as down, and
sidewise, and every other way-has wet you through up as high as the
armpits; and then the gentle zephyrs complete your discomfiture by
purloining your hat and making off across the sodden plain with it, at
a pace that defies pursuit.  the storm winds up in a pelting shower of
hailstones - round chunks of ice that cause me to wince whenever one makes
a square hit, and they strike the steel spokes of the bicycle and make
them produce harmonious sounds.  trundling through cooper lake basin,
after dark, i get occasional glimpses of mysterious shadowy objects
flitting hither and thither through the dusky pall around me.  the basin
is full of antelope, and my presence here in the darkness fills them
with consternation; their keen scent and instinctive knowledge of a
strange presence warn them of my proximity; and as they cannot see me
in the darkness they are flitting about in wild alarm.  stopping for the
night at lookout, i make an early start, in order to reach laramie city
for dinner.  these laramie plains "can smile and look pretty" when they
choose, and, as i bowl along over a fairly good road this sunny sunday
morning, they certainly choose.  the laramie river on my left, the medicine
bow and snowy ranges - black and white respectively - towering aloft to the
right, and the intervening plains dotted with herds of antelope, complete
a picture that can be seen nowhere save on the laramie plains.  reaching
a swell of the plains, that almost rises to the dignity of a hill, i can
see the nickel-plated wheels of the laramie wheelmen glistening in the
sunlight on the opposite side of the river several miles from where i
stand.  they have come out a few miles to meet me, but have taken the
wrong side of the river, thinking i had crossed below rock creek.  the
members of the laramie bicycle club are the first wheelmen i have seen
since leaving california; and, as i am personally acquainted at laramie,
it is needless to dwell on my reception at their hands.  the rambles of
the laramie club are well known to the cycling world from the many
interesting letters from the graphic pen of their captain, mr. owen,
who, with two other members, once took a tour on their wheels to the
yellowstone national park.  they have some very good natural roads around
laramie, but in their rambles over the mountains these "rough riders of
the rockies" necessarily take risks that are unknown to their fraternal
brethren farther east.

tuesday morning i pull out to scale the last range that separates me
from "the plains" - popularly known as such - and, upon arriving at the
summit, i pause to take a farewell view of the great and wonderful inter-
mountain country, across whose mountains, plains, and deserts i have
been travelling in so novel a manner for the last month.  the view from
where i stand is magnificent - ay, sublime beyond human power to describe -
and well calculated to make an indelible impression on the mind of one gazing
upon it, perhaps for the last time.  the laramie plains extend northward
and westward, like a billowy green sea.  emerging from a black canon
behind jelm mountain, the laramie river winds its serpentine course in
a northeast direction until lost to view behind the abutting mountains
of the range, on which i now stand, receiving tribute in its course from
the little laramie and numbers of smaller streams that emerge from the
mountainous bulwarks forming the western border of the marvellous picture
now before me.  the unusual rains have filled the numberless depressions
of the plains with ponds and lakelets that in their green setting glisten
and glimmer in the bright morning sunshine like gems.  a train is coming
from the west, winding around among them as if searching out the most
beautiful, and finally halts at laramie city, which nestles in their
midst - the fairest gem of them all - the "gem of the rockies." sheep
mountain, the embodiment of all that is massive and indestructible, juts boldly
and defiantly forward as though its mission were to stand guard over all
that lies to the west.  the medicine bow eange is now seen to greater
advantage, and a bald mountain-top here and there protrudes above the
dark forests, timidly, as if ashamed of its nakedness.  our old friend,
elk mountain, is still in view, a stately and magnificent pile, serving
as a land-mark for a hundred miles around.  beyond all this, to the west
and south - a good hundred miles away - are the snowy ranges; their hoary
peaks of glistening purity penetrating the vast blue dome above, like
monarchs in royal vestments robed.  still others are seen, white and
shadowy, stretching away down into colorado, peak beyond peak, ridge
beyond ridge, until lost in the impenetrable distance.

as i lean on my bicycle on this mountain-top, drinking in the glorious
scene, and inhaling the ozone-laden air, looking through the loop-holes
of recent experiences in crossing the great wonderland to the west; its
strange intermingling of forest-clad hills and grassy valleys; its barren,
rocky mountains and dreary, desolate plains; its vast, snowy solitudes
and its sunny, sylvan nooks; the no less strange intermingling of people;
the wandering red-skin with his pathetic history; the feverishly hopeful
prospector, toiling and searching for precious metals locked in the
eternal hills; and the wild and free cow-boy who, mounted on his wiry
bronco, roams these plains and mountains, free as the arab of the desert -
i heave a sigh as i realize that no tongue or pen of mine can hope to do
the subject justice.

my road is now over cheyenne pass, and from this point is mostly down-grade
to cheyenne.  soon i come to a naturally smooth granite surface which
extends for twelve miles, where i have to keep the brake set most of the
distance, and the constant friction heats the brake-spoon and scorches
the rubber tire black.  to-night i reach cheyenne, where i find a bicycle
club of twenty members, and where the fame of my journey from san francisco
draws such a crowd on the corner where i alight, that a blue-coated
guardian of the city's sidewalks requests me to saunter on over to the
hotel.  do i.  yes, i saunter over.  the cheyenne "cops" are bold, bad men
to trifle with.  they have to be "bold, bad men to trifle with," or the
wild, wicked cow-boys would come in and "paint the city red " altogether
too frequently.  it is the morning of june 4th as i bid farewell to the
"magic city," and, turning my back to the mountains, ride away over very
fair roads toward the rising sun.  i am not long out before meeting with
that characteristic feature of a scene on the western plains, a "prairie
schooner;" and meeting prairie schooners will now be a daily incident
of my eastward journey.  many of these "pilgrims" come from the backwoods
of missouri and arkansas, or the rural districts of some other western
state, where the persevering, but at present circumscribed, cycler has
not yet had time to penetrate, and the bicycle is therefore to them a
wonder to be gazed at and commented on, generally - it must be admitted -
in language more fluent as to words than in knowledge of the subject
discussed.  not far from where the trail leads out of crow creek bottom
on to the higher table-land, i find the grassy plain smoother than the
wagon-trail, and bowl along for a short distance as easily as one could
wish.  but not for long is this permitted; the ground becomes covered
with a carpeting of small, loose cacti that stick to the rubber tire
with the clinging tenacity of a cuckle-burr to a mule's tail.  of course
they scrape off again as they come round to the bridge of the fork, but
it isn't the tire picking them up that fills me with lynx-eyed vigilance
and alarm; it is the dreaded possibility of taking a header among these
awful vegetables that unnerves one, starts the cold chills chasing each
other up and down my spinal column, and causes staring big beads of
perspiration to ooze out of my forehead.  no more appalling physical
calamity on a small scale could befall a person than to take a header
on to a cactus-covered greensward; millions of miniature needles would
fill his tender hide with prickly sensations, and his vision with floating
stars.  it would perchance cast clouds of gloom over his whole life.
henceforth he would be a solemn-visaged, bilious-eyed needle-cushion
among men, and would never smile again.  i once knew a young man named
whipple, who sat down on a bunch of these cacti at a picnic in virginia
dale, wyo., and he never smiled again.  two meek-eyed maidens of the
rockies invited him to come and take a seat between them on a thin,
innocuous-looking layer of hay.  smilingly poor, unsuspecting whipple
accepted the invitation; jokingly he suggested that it would be a rose
between two thorns.  but immediately he sat down he became convinced that
it was the liveliest thorn - or rather millions of thorns - between two
roses.  of course the two meek-eyed maidens didn't know it was there, how
should they.  but, all the same, he never smiled again - not on them.

at the section-house, where i call for dinner, i make the mistake of
leaving the bicycle behind the house, and the woman takes me for an
uncommercial traveller - yes, a tramp.  she snaps out, "we can't feed
everybody that comes along," and shuts the door in my face.  yesterday i
was the centre of admiring crowds in the richest city of its size in
america; to-day i am mistaken for a hungry-eyed tramp, and spurned from
the door by a woman with a faded calico dress and a wrathy what - are?
look in her eye.  such is life in the far west.

gradually the rockies have receded from my range of vision, and i am
alone on the boundless prairie.  there is a feeling of utter isolation
at finding one's self alone on the plains that is not experienced in the
mountain country.  there is something tangible and companionable about a
mountain; but here, where there is no object in view anywhere - nothing
but the boundless, level plains, stretching away on every hand as far
as the eye can reach, i and all around, whichever way one looks, nothing
but the green carpet below and the cerulean arch above-one feels that
he is the sole occupant of a vast region of otherwise unoccupied space.
this evening, while fording pole creek with the bicycle, my clothes, and
shoes - all at the same time - the latter fall in the river; and m my wild
scramble after the shoes i drop some of the clothes; then i drop the
machine in my effort to save the clothes, and wind up by falling down
in the water with everything.  everything is fished out again all right,
but a sad change has come over the clothes and shoes.  this morning i was
mistaken for a homeless, friendless wanderer; this evening as i stand
on the bank of pole creek with nothing over me but a thin mantle of
native modesty, and ruefully wring the water out of my clothes, i feel
considerably like one.  pine bluffs provides me with shelter for the
night, and a few miles' travel next morning takes me across the boundary-line
into nebraska my route leads down pole creek, with ridable roads probably
half the distance, and low, rocky bluffs lining both sides of the narrow
valley, and leading up to high, rolling prairie beyond.  over these rocky
bluffs the indians were wont to stampede herds of buffalo, which falling
over the precipitous bluffs, would be killed by hundreds, thus procuring
an abundance of beef for the long winter.  there are no buffalo here now
- they have departed with the indians - and i shall never have a chance to
add a bison to my game-list on this tour.  but they have left plenty of
tangible evidence behind, in the shape of numerous deeply worn trails
leading from the bluffs to the creek.

the prairie hereabouts is spangled with a wealth of divers-colored flowers
that fill the morning air with gratifying perfume.  the air is soft and
balmy, in striking contrast to the chilly atmosphere of early morning
in the mountain country, where the accumulated snows of a thousand winters
exert their chilling influence in opposition to the benign rays of old
sol.  this evening i pass through "prairie-dog city," the largest
congregation of prairie-dog dwellings met with on the tour.  the "city"
covers hundreds of acres of ground, and the dogs come out in such
multitudes to present their noisy and excitable protests against my
intrusion, that i consider myself quite justified in shooting at them.
i hit one old fellow fair and square, but he disappears like a flash
down his hole, which now becomes his grave.  the lightning-like movements
of the prairie-dog, and his instinctive inclination toward his home,
combine to perform the last sad rites of burial for his body at death.
as, toward dark, i near potter station, where i expect accommodation for
the night, a storm comes howling from the west, and it soon resolves
into a race between me and the storm.  with a good ridable road i could
win the race; but, being handicapped with an unridable trail, nearly
obscured beneath tall, rank grass, the storm overtakes me, and comes in
at potter station a winner by about three hundred lengths.

in the morning i start out in good season, and, nearing sidney, the road
becomes better, and i sweep into that enterprising town at a becoming
pace.  i conclude to remain at sidney for dinner, and pass the remainder
of the forenoon visiting the neighboring fort.






chapter iv.





from the great plains to the atlantic.

through the courtesy of the commanding officer at fort sidney i am enabled
to resume my journey eastward under the grateful shade of a military
summer helmet in lieu of the semi-sombrero slouch that has lasted me
through from san francisco.  certainly it is not without feelings of
compunction that one discards an old friend, that has gallantly stood
by me through thick and thin throughout the eventful journey across the
inter-mountain country; but the white helmet gives such a delightfully
imposing air to my otherwise forlorn and woebegone figure that i ride
out of sidney feeling quite vain.  the first thing done is to fill a poor
yellow-spotted snake - whose head is boring in the sand - with lively
surprise, by riding over his mottled carcass; and only the fact of the
tire being rubber, and not steel, enables him to escape unscathed.  this
same evening, while halting for the night at lodge pole station, the
opportunity of observing the awe-inspiring aspect of a great thunder-storm
on the plains presents itself.  with absolutely nothing to obstruct the.
vision the alpha and omega of the whole spectacle are plainly observable.
the gradual mustering of the forces is near the rockies to the westward,
then the skirmish-line of fleecy cloudlets comes rolling and tumbling
in advance, bringing a current of air that causes the ponderous wind-mill
at the railway tank to "about face" sharply, and sets its giant arms
to whirling vigorously around.  behind comes the compact, inky veil that
spreads itself over the whole blue canopy above, seemingly banishing all
hope of the future; and athwart its cimmerian surface shoot zigzag streaks
of lightning, accompanied by heavy, muttering thunder that rolls and
reverberates over the boundless plains seemingly conscious of the
spaciousness of its play-ground.  broad sheets of electric flame play
along the ground, filling the air with a strange, unnatural light; heavy,
pattering raindrops begin to fall, and, ten minutes after, a pelting,
pitiless down-pour is drenching the sod-cabin of the lonely rancher,
and, for the time being, converting the level plain into a shallow lake.
a fleet of prairie schooners is anchored in the south platte bottom,
waiting for it to dry up, as i trundle down that stream - every mile made
interesting by reminiscences of indian fights and massacres - next day,
toward ogallala; and one of the "pilgrims" looks wise as i approach,
and propounds the query, "does it hev ter git very muddy afore yer kin
ride yer verlocify, mister?" "ya-as, purty dog-goned muddy," i drawl
out in reply; for, although comprehending his meaning, i don't care to
venture into an explanatory lecture of uncertain length.  seven weeks'
travel through bicycleless territory would undoubtedly convert an angel
into a hardened prevaricator, so far as answering questions is concerned.
this afternoon is passed the first homestead, as distinguished from a
ranch-consisting of a small tent pitched near a few acres of newly
upturned prairie - in the picket-line of the great agricultural empire
that is gradually creeping westward over the plains, crowding the
autocratic cattle-kings and their herds farther west,. even as the indians
and their still greater herds - buffaloes - have been crowded out by the
latter.  at ogallala--which but a few years ago was par excellence the
cow-boys' rallying point - "homesteads," "timber claims," and "pre-emption"
now form the all-absorbing topic.  "the platte's 'petered' since the
hoosiers have begun to settle it up," deprecatingly reflects a bronzed
cow-boy at the hotel supper-table; and, from his standpoint, he is
correct.  passing the next night in the dug-out of a homesteader, in the
forks of the north and south platte, i pass in the morning buffalo bill's
home ranch (the place where a ranch proprietor himself resides is
denominated the "home ranch" as distinctive from a ranch presided over
by employes only), the house and improvements of which are said to be
the finest in western nebraska.  taking dinner at north platte city, i
cross over a substantial wagon-bridge, spanning the turgid yellow stream
just below where the north and south branches fork, and proceed eastward
as " the platte " simply, reaching brady island for the night.  here i
encounter extraordinary difficulties in getting supper.  four families,
representing the union pacific force at this place, all living in separate
houses, constitute the population of brady island.  "all our folks are
just recovering from the scarlet fever," is the reply to my first
application; "muvver's down to ve darden on ve island, and we ain't dot
no bread baked," says a barefooted youth at house no. 2; "me ould ooman's
across ter the naybur's, 'n' there ain't a boite av grub cooked in the
shanty," answers the proprietor of no. 3, seated on the threshold, puffing
vigorously at the traditional short clay; "we all to nord blatte been
to veesit, und shust back ter home got mit notings gooked," winds up the
gloomy programme at no. 4.  i am hesitating about whether to crawl in
somewhere, supperless, for the night, or push on farther through the
darkness, when, "i don't care, pa! it's a shame for a stranger to come
here where there are four families and have to go without supper," greet
my ears in a musical, tremulous voice.  it is the convalescent daughter
of house no. 1, valiantly championing my cause; and so well does she
succeed that her "pa" comes out, and notwithstanding my protests, insists
on setting out the best they have cooked.  homesteads now become more
frequent, groves of young cottonwoods, representing timber claims, are
occasionally encountered, and section-house accommodation becomes a thing
of the past.

near willow island i come within a trifle of stepping on a belligerent
rattlesnake, and in a moment his deadly fangs are hooked to one of the
thick canvas gaiters i am wearing.  were my exquisitely outlined calves
encased in cycling stockings only, i should have had a "heap sick foot"
to amuse myself with for the next three weeks, though there is little
danger of being "snuffed out" entirely by a rattlesnake favor these
days; an all-potent remedy is to drink plenty of whiskey as quickly as
possible after being bitten, and whiskey is one of the easiest things
to obtain in the west.  giving his snakeship to understand that i don't
appreciate his ''good intentions " by vigorously shaking him off, i
turn my "barker "loose on him, and quickly convert him into a "goody-good
snake; " for if "the only good indian is a dead one," surely the same
terse remark applies with much greater force to the vicious and deadly
rattler.  as i progress eastward, sod-houses and dug-outs become less
frequent, and at long intervals frame school-houses appear to remind me
that i am passing through a civilized country.  stretches of sand alternate
with ridable roads all down the platte.  often i have to ticklishly wobble
along a narrow space between two yawning ruts, over ground that is
anything but smooth.  i consider it a lucky day that passes without adding
one or more to my long and eventful list of headers, and to-day i am
fairly "unhorsed" by a squall of wind that-taking me unawares-blows
me and the bicycle fairly over.

east of plum creek a greater proportion of ridable road is encountered,
but they still continue to be nothing more than well-worn wagon-trails
across the prairie, and when teams are met en route westward one has to
give and the other take, in order to pass.  it is doubtless owing to
misunderstanding a cycler's capacities, rather than ill-nature, that
makes these western teamsters oblivious to the precept, "it is better
to give than to receive;" and if ignorance is bliss, an outfit i meet
to-day ought to comprise the happiest mortals in existence.  near elm
creek i meet a train of "schooners," whose drivers fail to recognize
my right to one of the two wheel-tracks; and in my endeavor to ride past
them on the uneven greensward, i am rewarded by an inglorious header.  a
dozen freckled arkansawish faces are watching my movements with undisguised
astonishment; and when my crest - alien self is spread out on the prairie,
these faces - one and all - resolve into expansive grins, and a squeaking
female voice from out nearest wagon, pipes: "la me! that's a right smart
chance of a travelling machine, but, if that's the way they stop 'em, i
wonder they don't break every blessed bone in their body." but all sorts
of people are mingled promiscuously here, for, soon after this incident,
two young men come running across the prairie from a semi-dug-out, who
prove to be college graduates from "the hub," who are rooting prairie
here in nebraska, preferring the free, independent life of a western
farmer to the restraints of a position at an eastern desk.  they are more
conversant with cycling affairs than myself, and, having heard of my
tour, have been on the lookout, expecting i would pass this way.  at
kearney junction the roads are excellent, and everything is satisfactory;
but an hour's ride east of that city i am shocked at the gross misconduct
of a vigorous and vociferous young mule who is confined alone in a
pasture, presumably to be weaned.  he evidently mistakes the picturesque
combination of man and machine for his mother, as, on seeing us approach,
he assumes a thirsty, anxious expression, raises his unmusical, undignified
voice, and endeavors to jump the fence.  he follows along the whole length
of the pasture, and when he gets to the end, and realizes that i am
drawing away from him, perhaps forever, he bawls out in an agony of grief
and anxiety, and, recklessly bursting through the fence, comes tearing
down the road, filling the air with the unmelodious notes of his soul-
harrowing music.  the road is excellent for a piece, and i lead him a
lively chase, but he finally overtakes me, and, when i slow up, he jogs
along behind quite contentedly.  east of kearney the sod-houses disappear
entirely, and the improvements are of a more substantial character.  at
"wood river i "make my bow" to the first growth of natural timber since
leaving the mountains, which indicates my gradual advance off the vast
timberless plains.  passing through grand island, central city, and other
towns, i find myself anchored saturday evening, june 14th, at duncan - a
settlement of polackers - an honest-hearted set of folks, who seem to
thoroughly understand a cycler's digestive capacity, though understanding
nothing whatever about the uses of the machine.  resuming my journey next
morning, i find the roads fair.  after crossing the loup river, and passing
through columbus, i reach-about 11 a.m.- a country school-house, with a
gathering of farmers hanging around outside, awaiting the arrival of the
parson to open the meeting.  alighting, i am engaged in answering forty
questions or thereabouts to the minute when that pious individual canters
up, and, dismounting from his nag, comes forward and joins in the
conversation.  he invites me to stop over and hear the sermon; and when
i beg to be excused because desirous of pushing ahead while the weather
is favorable his reverence solemnly warns me against desecrating the
sabbath by going farther than the prescribed "sabbath-day's journey."

at premont i bid farewell to the platte - which turns south and joins the
missouri river at plattsmouth - and follow the old military road through
the elkhorn valley to omaha.  "military road" sounds like music in a
cycler's ear - suggestive of a well-kept and well-graded highway; but this
particular military road between fremont and omaha fails to awaken any
blithesome sensations to-day, for it is almost one continuous mud-hole.
it is called a military road simply from being the route formerly traversed
by troops and supply trains bound for the western forts.  besting a day
in omaha, i obtain a permit to trundle my wheel across the union pacific
bridge that spans the missouri river - the "big muddy," toward which i
have been travelling so long - between omaha and council bluffs; i bid
farewell to nebraska, and cross over to iowa.  heretofore i have omitted
mentioning the tremendously hot weather i have encountered lately, because
of my inability to produce legally tangible evidence; but to-day, while
eating dinner at a farm-house, i leave the bicycle standing against the
fence, and old sol ruthlessly unsticks the tire, so that, when i mount,
it comes off, and gives me a gymnastic lesson all unnecessary.  my first
day's experience in the great "hawkeye state" speaks volumes for the
hospitality of the people, there being quite a rivalry between two
neighboring farmers about which should take me in to dinner.  a compromise
is finally made, by which i am to eat dinner at one place, and be "turned
loose" in a cherry orchard afterward at the other, to which happy
arrangement i, of course, enter no objections.  in striking contrast to
these friendly advances is my own unpardonable conduct the same evening
in conversation with an honest old farmer.

"i see you are taking notes.  i suppose you keep track of the crops as
you travel along?" says the h.  o.  f.  "certainly, i take more notice of
the crops than anything; i'm a natural born agriculturist myself." "well,"
continues the farmer, "right here where we stand is carson township."
"ah! indeed.  is it possible that i have at last arrived at carson township."
"you have heard of the township before, then, eh." "heard of it!
why, man alive, carson township is all the talk out in the rockies; in
fact, it is known all over the world as the finest township for corn in
iowa." this sort of conduct is, i admit, unwarrantable in the extreme;
but cycling is responsible for it all.  if continuous cycling is productive
of a superfluity of exhilaration, and said exhilaration bubbles over
occasionally, plainly the bicycle is to blame.  so forcibly does this
latter fact intrude upon me as i shake hands with the farmer, and
congratulate him on his rare good fortune in belonging to carson township
that i mount, and with a view of taking a little of the shine out of it,
ride down the long, steep hill leading to the bridge across the nishnebotene
river at a tremendous pace.  the machine "kicks" against this treatment,
however, and, when about half wray down, it strikes a hole and sends me
spinning and gyrating through space; and when i finally strike terra
firma, it thumps me unmercifully in the ribs ere it lets me up.  "variable"
is the word descriptive of the iowa roads; for seventy-five miles due
east of omaha the prairie rolls like a heavy atlantic swell, and during
a day's journey i pass through a dozen alternate stretches of muddy and
dusky road; for like a huge watering-pot do the rain-clouds pass to and
fro over this great garden of the west, that is practically one continuous
fertile farm from the missouri to the mississippi.  passing through des
moines on the 23d, muddy roads and hot, thunder-showery weather characterize
my journey through central iowa, aggravated by the inevitable question,
"why don't you ride?" one solomon-visaged individual asking me if the
railway company wouldn't permit me to ride along one of the rails.  no
base, unworthy suspicions of a cycler's inability to ride on a two-inch
rail finds lodgement in the mind of this wiseacre; but his compassionate
heart is moved with tender solicitude as to whether the soulless "company"
will, or will not, permit it.  hurrying timorously through grinnell - the
city that was badly demolished and scattered all over the surrounding
country by a cyclone in 1882 - i pause at victor, where i find the inhabitants
highly elated over the prospect of building a new jail with the fines
nightly inflicted on graders employed on a new railroad near by, who
come to town and "hilare" every evening.  " what kind of a place do you
call this." i inquire, on arriving at a queer-looking town twenty-five
miles west of iowa city.

"this is south amana, one of the towns of the amana society," is the
civil reply.  the amana society is found upon inquiry to be a communism
of germans, numbering 15,000 souls, and owning 50,000 acres of choice
land in a body, with woollen factories, four small towns, and the best
of credit everywhere.  everything is common property, and upon withdrawal
or expulsion, a member takes with him only the value of what he brought
in.  the domestic relations are as usual; and while no person of ambition
would be content with the conditions of life here, the slow, ease-loving,
methodical people composing the society seem well satisfied with their
lot, and are, perhaps, happier, on the whole, than the average outsider.
i remain here for dinner, and take a look around.  the people, the
buildings, the language, the food, everything, is precisely as if it had
been picked up bodily in some rural district in germany, and set down
unaltered here in iowa.  "wie gehts," i venture, as i wheel past a couple
of plump, rosy-cheeked maidens, in the quaint, old-fashioned garb of the
german peasantry.  "wie gehts," is the demure reply from them, both at
once; but not the shadow of a dimple responds to my unhappy attempt to
win from them a smile.  pretty but not coquettish are these communistic
maidens of amana.  at tiffin, the stilly air of night, is made joyous with
the mellifluous voices of whip-poor-wills-the first i have heard on the
tour-and their tuneful concert is impressed on my memory in happy contrast
to certain other concerts, both vocal and instrumental, endured en route.
passing through iowa city, crossing cedar river at moscow, nine days
after crossing the missouri, i hear the distant whistle of a mississippi
steamboat.  its hoarse voice is sweetest music to me, heralding the fact
that two-thirds of my long tour across the continent is completed.
crossing the "father of waters" over the splendid government bridge
between davenport and rock island, i pass over into illinois.  for several
miles my route leads up the mississippi river bottom, over sandy roads;
but nearing rock river, the sand disappears, and, for some distance, an
excellent road winds through the oak-groves lining this beautiful stream.
the green woods are free from underbrush, and a cool undercurrent of air
plays amid the leafy shades, which, if not ambrosial, are none the less
grateful, as it registers over 100 in the sun; without, the silvery
sheen of the river glimmers through the interspaces; the dulcet notes
of church-bells come floating on the breeze from over the river, seeming
to proclaim, with their melodious tongues, peace and good-will to all.
eock river, with its 300 yards in width of unbridged waters, now obstructs
my path, and the ferryboat is tied up on the other shore.  "whoop-ee,"
i yell at the ferryman's hut opposite, but without receiving any response.
"wh-o-o-p-e-ee," i repeat in a gentle, civilized voice-learned, by the
by, two years ago on the crow reservation in montana, and which sets the
surrounding atmosphere in a whirl and drowns out the music of the church-
bells it has no effect whatever on the case-hardened ferryman in the
hut; he pays no heed whatever until my persuasive voice is augmented by
the voices of two new arrivals in a buggy, when he sallies serenely forth
and slowly ferries us across.  riding along rather indifferent roads,
between farms worth $100 an acre, through the handsome town of genesee,
stopping over night at atkinson, i resume my journey next morning through
a country abounding in all that goes to make people prosperous, if not
happy.  pretty names are given to places hereabouts, for on my left i
pass "pink prairie, bordered with green river." crossing over into
bureau county, i find splendid gravelled roads, and spend a most agreeable
hour with the jolly bicycle club, of princeton, the handsome county seat
of bureau county, pushing on to lamoille for the night, the enterprising
village barber there hustles me into his cosey shop, and shaves, shampoos,
shingles, bay-rums, and otherwise manipulates me, to the great enhancement
of my personal appearance, all, so he says, for the honor of having
lathered the chin of the "great and only--" in fact, the illinoisians
seem to be most excellent folks.  after three days' journey through the
great prairie state my head is fairly turned with kindness and flattery;
but the third night, as if to rebuke my vanity, i am bluntly refused
shelter at three different farm-houses.  i am benighted, and conclude to
make the best of it by "turning in" under a hay-cock; but the fox river
mosquitoes oust me in short order, and compel me to "mosey along" through
the gloomy night to yorkville.  at yorkville a stout german, on being
informed that i am going to ride to chicago, replies, "what. ghigago mit
dot.  why, mine dear yellow, ghi-gago's more as vorty miles; you gan't
ride mit dot to ghigago;" and the old fellow's eyes fairly bulge with
astonishment at the bare idea of riding forty miles "mit dot." i
considerately refrain from telling him of my already 2,500-mile jaunt
"mit dot," lest an apoplectic fit should waft his teutonic soul to realms
of sauer-kraut bliss and limburger happiness forever.  on the morning of
july 4th i roll into chicago, where, having persuaded myself that i
deserve a few days' rest, i remain till the democratic convention winds
up on the 13th.

fifteen miles of good riding and three of tough trundling, through deep
sand, brings me into indiana, which for the first thirty-five miles
around the southern shore of lake michigan is "simply and solely sand."
finding it next to impossible to traverse the wagon-roads, i trundle
around the water's edge, where the sand is firmer because wet.  after
twenty miles of this i have to shoulder the bicycle and scale the huge
sand-dunes that border the lake here, and after wandering for an hour
through a bewildering wilderness of swamps, sand-hills, and hickory
thickets, i finally reach miller station for the night.  this place is
enough to give one the yellow-edged blues: nothing but swamps, sand,
sad-eyed turtles, and ruthless, relentless mosquitoes.  at chesterton the
roads improve, but still enough sand remains to break the force of
headers, which, notwithstanding my long experience on the road, i still
manage to execute with undesirable frequency.  to-day i take one, and
while unravelling myself and congratulating my lucky stars at being in
a lonely spot where none can witness my discomfiture, a gruff, sarcastic
"haw-haw" falls like a funeral knell on my ear, and a lanky "hoosier"
rides up on a diminutive pumpkin-colored mule that looks a veritable
pygmy between his hoop-pole legs.  it is but justice to explain that this
latter incident did not occur in "posey county."

at la porte the roads improve for some distance, but once again i am
benighted, and sleep under a wheat-shock.  traversing several miles of
corduroy road, through huckleberry swamps, next morning, i reach cram's
point for breakfast.  a remnant of some indian tribe still lingers around
here and gathers huckleberries for the market, two squaws being in the
village purchasing supplies for their camp in the swamps.  "what's the
name of these indians here?" i ask..  "one of em's blinkie, and t'other's
seven-up," is the reply, in a voice that implies such profound knowledge
of the subject that i forbear to investigate further.

splendid gravel roads lead from crum's point to south bend, and on through
mishawaka, alternating with sandy stretches to goshen, which town is
said - by the goshenites - to be the prettiest in indiana; but there seems
to be considerable pride of locality in the great hoosier state, and i
venture there are scores of "prettiest towns in indiana." nevertheless,
goshen is certainly a very handsome place, with unusually broad, well-shaded
streets; the centre of a magnificent farming country, it is romantically
situated on the banks of the beautiful elkhart eiver.  at "wawaka i find
a corpulent 300-pound cycler, who, being afraid to trust his jumbolean
proportions on an ordinary machine, has had an extra stout bone-shaker
made to order, and goes out on short runs with a couple of neighbor
wheelmen, who, being about fifty per cent, less bulky, ride regulation
wheels.  "jumbo" goes all right when mounted, but, being unable to mount
without aid, he seldom ventures abroad by himself for fear of having to
foot it back.  ninety-five degrees in the shade characterizes the weather
these days, and i generally make a few miles in the gloaming - not, of
course, because it is cooler, but because the "gloaming" is so delightfully
romantic.

at ten o'clock in the morning, july 17th, i bowl across the boundary
line into ohio.  following the merchants' and bankers' telegraph road to
napoleon, i pass through a district where the rain has overlooked them
for two months; the rear wheel of the bicycle is half buried in hot dust;
the blackberries are dead on the bushes, and the long-suffering corn
looks as though afflicted with the yellow jaundice.  i sup this same
evening with a family of germans, who have been settled here forty years,
and scarcely know a word of english yet.  a fat, phlegmatic-looking baby
is peacefully reposing in a cradle, which is simply half a monster pumpkin
scooped out and dried; it is the most intensely rustic cradle in the
world.  surely, this youngster's head ought to be level on agricultural
affairs, when he grows up, if anybody's ought.  from napoleon my route
leads up the maumee river and canal, first trying the tow-path of the
latter, and then relinquishing it for the very fair wagon-road.  the
maumee river, winding through its splendid rich valley, seems to possess
a peculiar beauty all its own, and my mind, unbidden, mentally compares
it with our old friend, the humboldt.  the latter stream traverses dreary
plains, where almost nothing but sagebrush grows; the maumee waters a
smiling valley, where orchards, fields, and meadows alternate with sugar-
maple groves, and in its fair bosom reflects beautiful landscape views,
that are changed and rebeautified by the master-hand of the sun every hour
of the day, and doubly embellished at night by the moon.  it is whispered that
during " the late unpleasantness " the ohio regiments could out-yell the
louisiana tigers, or any other confederate troops, two to one.  who has not
heard the "ohio yell?" most people are magnanimously inclined to regard this
rumor as simply a "gag" on the buckeye boys; but it isn't.  the ohioans
are to the manner born; the "buckeye yell" is a tangible fact.  all along the
maumee it resounds in my ears; nearly every man or boy, who from the
fields, far or near, sees me bowling along the road, straightway delivers
himself of a yell, pure and simple.  at perrysburg, i strike the famous
"maumee pike"-forty miles of stone road, almost a dead level.  the western
half is kept in rather poor repair these days; but from fremont eastward it
is splendid wheeling.  the atmosphere of bellevue is blue with politics, and
myself and another innocent, unsuspecting individual, hailing from new york,
are enticed into a political meeting by a wily politician, and dexterously made to
pose before the assembled company as two gentlemen who have come - one
from the atlantic, the other from the pacific - to witness the overwhelming
success of the only honest, horny-handed, double-breasted patriots - the...
party.  the roads are found rather sandy east of the pike, and the roadful
of wagons going to the circus, which exhibits to-day at norwalk, causes
considerable annoyance.

erie county, through which i am now passing, is one of the finest fruit
countries in the world, and many of the farmers keep open orchard.  staying
at eidgeville overnight, i roll into cleveland, and into the out-stretched
arms of a policeman, at 10 o'clock, next morning.  "he was violating the
city ordinance by riding on the sidewalk," the arresting policeman informs
the captain.  "ah! he was, hey!" thunders the captain, in a hoarse, bass
voice that causes my knees to knock together with fear and trembling;
and the captain's eye seems to look clear through my trembling form.
"p-l-e-a-s-e, s-i-r, i d-i-d-n't t-r-y t-o d-o i-t," i falter, in a weak,
gasping voice that brings tears to the eyes of the assembled officers
and melts the captain's heart, so that he is already wavering between
justice and mercy when a local wheelman comes gallantly to the rescue,
and explains my natural ignorance of cleveland's city laws, and i breathe
the joyous air of freedom once again.  three members of the cleveland
bicycle club and a visiting wheelman accompany me ten miles out, riding
down far-famed euclid avenue, and calling at lake view cemetery to pay
a visit to garfleld's tomb.  i bid them farewell at euclid village.
following the ridge road leading along the shore of lake erie to buffalo,
i ride through a most beautiful farming country, passing through "willoughby
and mentor-garfield's old home.  splendidly kept roads pass between avenues
of stately maples, that cast a grateful shade athwart the highway, both
sides of which are lined with magnificent farms, whose fields and meadows
fairly groan beneath their wealth of produce, whose fructiferous orchards
arc marvels of productiveness, and whose barns and stables would be
veritable palaces to the sod-housed homesteaders on nebraska's frontier
prairies.  prominent among them stands the old garfield homestead - a fine
farm of one hundred and sixty-five acres, at present managed by mrs.
garfield's brother.  smiling villages nestling amid stately groves, rearing
white church-spires from out their green, bowery surroundings, dot the
low, broad, fertile shore-land to the left; the gleaming waters of lake
erie here and there glisten like burnished steel through the distant
interspaces, and away beyond stretches northward, like a vast mirror,
to kiss the blue canadian skies.  near conneaut i whirl the dust of the
buckeye state from my tire and cress over into pennsylvania, where, from
the little hamlet of springfield, the roads become good, then better,
and finally best at girard-the home of the veteran showman, dan rice,
the beautifying works of whose generous hand are everywhere visible in
his native town.  splendid is the road and delightful the country coming
east from girard; even the red brick school-houses are embowered amid
leafy groves; and so it continues with ever-varying, ever-pleasing beauty
to erie, after which the highway becomes hardly so good.

twenty-four hours after entering pennsylvania i make my exit across the
boundary into the empire state.  the roads continue good, and after
dinner i reach westfield, six miles from the famous lake chautauqua,
which beautiful hill and forest embowered sheet of water is popularly
believed by many of its numerous local admirers to be the highest navigable
lake in the world.  if so, however, lake tahoe in the sierra nevada
mountains comes next, as it is about six thousand feet above the level
of the sea, and has three steamers plying on its waters.  at fredonia i
am shown through the celebrated watch-movement factory here, by the
captain of the fredonia club, who accompanies me to silver creek,
where we call on another enthusiastic wheelman-a physician who uses
the wheel in preference to a horse, in making professional calls
throughout the surround-in' country.  taking supper with the genial "doc.,"
they both accompany me to the s.ummit of a steep hill leading up out of
the creek bottom.  no wheelman has ever yet rode up this hill, save the
muscular and gritty captain of the fredonia club, though several have
attempted the feat.  from the top my road ahead is plainly visible for miles,
leading through the broad and smiling cattaraugus valley that is spread
out like a vast garden below, through which cattaraugus creek slowly
winds its tortuous way.  stopping over night at angola i proceed to
buffalo next morning, catching the first glimpse of that important " seaport
of the lakes," where, fifteen miles across the bay, the wagon-road is
almost licked by the swashing waves; and entering the city over a " misfit"
plank-road, off which i am almost upset by the most audaciously
indifferent woman in the world.  a market woman homeward bound with
her empty truck-wagon, recognizes my road-rights to the extent of barely
room to squeeze past between her wagon and the ditch; and holds her long,
stiff buggy-whip so that it " swipes " me viciously across the face, knocks
my helmet off into the mud ditch, and well-nigh upsets mo into the same.
the woman-a crimson-crested blonde - jogs serenely along without even
deigning to turn her head.  leaving the bicycle at "isham's "-who volunteers
some slight repairs-i take a flying visit by rail to see niagara falls, returning
the same evening to enjoy the proffered hospitality of a genial member of
the buffalo bicycle club.  seated on the piazza of his residence, on
delaware avenue, this evening, the symphonious voice of the club-whistle
is cast adrift whenever the glowing orb of a cycle-lamp heaves in sight
through the darkness, and several members of the club are thus rounded
up and their hearts captured by the witchery of a smile-a " smile " in
buffalo, i hasten to explain, is no kin whatever to a rocky mountain "smile"
- far be it from it.  this club-wliistle of the buffalo bicycle club happens
to sing the same melodious song as the police - whistle at washington, d.
c.; and the buffalo cyclers who graced the national league - meet at the
capital with their presence took a folio of club music along.  a small
but frolicsome party of them on top of the washington monument, "heaved
a sigh " from their whistles, at a comrade passing along the street
below, when a corpulent policeman, naturally mistaking it for a signal
from a brother "cop," hastened to climb the five hundred feet or thereabouts
of ascent up the monument.  when he arrived, puffing and perspiring, to
the summit, and discovered his mistake, the wheelmen say he made such
awful use of the queen's english that the atmosphere had a blue, sulphurous
tinge about it for some time after.  leaving buffalo next morning i pass
through batavia, where the wheelmen have a most aesthetic little club-room.
besides being jovial and whole-souled fellows, they are awfully sesthetic;
and the sweetest little japanese curios and bric-d-brac decorate the
walls and tables.  stopping over night at leboy, in company with the
president and captain of the leboy club, i visit the state fish-hatchery
at mumford next morning, and ride on through the genesee valley, finding
fair roads through the valley, though somewhat hilly and stony toward
canandaigua.  inquiring the best road to geneva i am advised of the
superiority of the one leading past the poor-house.  finding them somewhat
intricate, and being too super-sensitive to stop people and ask them the
road to the poor-house, i deservedly get lost, and am wandering erratically
eastward through the darkness, when i fortunately meet a wheelman in a
buggy, who directs me to his mother's farm-house near by, with instructions
to that most excellent lady to accommodate me for the night.  nine o'clock
next morning i reach fair geneva, so beautifully situated on seneca's
silvery lake, passing the state agricultural farm en route; continuing
on up the seneca eiver, passing-through waterloo and seneca falls to
cayuga, and from thence to auburn and skaneateles, where i heave a sigh
at the thoughts of leaving the last - i cannot say the loveliest, for all
are equally lovely - of that beautiful chain of lakes that transforms
this part of new york state into a vast and delightful summer resort.

"down a romantic swiss glen, where scores of sylvan nooks and rippling
rills invite one to cast about for fairies and sprites," is the word
descriptive of my route from marcellus next morning.  once again, on
nearing the camillus outlet from the narrow vale, i hear the sound of
sunday bells, and after the church-bell-less western wilds, it seems to
me that their notes have visited me amid beautiful scenes, strangely
often of late.  arriving at camillus, i ask the name of the sparkling
little stream that dances along this fairy glen like a child at play,
absorbing the sun-rays and coquettishly reflecting them in the faces of
the venerable oaks that bend over it like loving guardians protecting
it from evil.  my ears are prepared to hear a musical indian name -
"laughing-waters " at least; but, like a week's washing ruthlessly intruding
upon love's young dream, falls on my waiting ears the unpoetic misnomer,
"nine-mile creek." over good roads to syracuse, and from thence my route
leads down the erie canal, alternately riding down the canal tow-path,
the wagon-roads, and between the tracks of the new york central railway.
on the former, the greatest drawback to peaceful cycling is the towing-mule
and his unwarrantable animosity toward the bicycle, and the awful,
unmentionable profanity engendered thereby in the utterances of the
boatmen.  sometimes the burden of this sulphurous profanity is aimed at
me, sometimes at the inoffensive bicycle, or both of us collectively,
but oftener is it directed at the unspeakable mule, who is really the
only party to blame.  a mule scares, not because he is really afraid, but
because he feels skittishly inclined to turn back, or to make trouble
between his enemies - the boatmen, his task-master, and the cycler, an
intruder on his exclusive domain, the erie tow-path.  a span of mules
will pretend to scare, whirl around, and jerk loose from the driver, and
go "scooting" back down the tow-path in a manner indicating that nothing
less than a stone wall would stop them; but, exactly in the nick of time
to prevent the tow-line jerking them sidewise into the canal, they stop.
trust a mule for never losing his head when he runs away, as does his
hot-headed relative, the horse; who never once allows surrounding
circumstances to occupy his thoughts to an extent detrimental to his own
self-preservative interests.  the erie canal mule's first mission in life
is to engender profanity and strife between boatmen and cyclists, and
the second is to work and chew hay, which brings him out about even with
the world all round.  at rome i enter the famous and beautiful mohawk
valley, a place long looked forward to with much pleasurable anticipation,
from having heard so often of its natural beauties and its interesting
historical associations.  "it's the garden spot of the world; and
travellers who have been all over europe and everywhere, say there's
nothing in the world to equal the quiet landscape beauty of the mohawk
valley," enthusiastically remarks an old gentelman in spectacles, whom
i chance to encounter on the heights east of herkimer.  of the first
assertion i have nothing to say, having passed through a dozen "garden
spots of the world " on this tour across america; but there is no
gainsaying the fact that the mohawk valley, as viewed from this vantage
spot, is wonderfully beautiful.  i think it must have been on this spot
that the poet received inspiration to compose the beautiful song that
is sung alike in the quiet homes of the valley itself and in the trapper's
and hunter's tent on the far off yellowstone - "fair is the vale where
the mohawk gently glides, on its clear, shining way to the sea." the
valley ia one of the natural gateways of commerce, for, at little falls -
where it contracts to a mere pass between the hills - one can almost throw
a stone across six railway tracks, the erie canal and the mohawk river.
spending an hour looking over the magnificent capitol building at albany,
i cross the hudson, and proceed to ride eastward between the two tracks
of the boston & albany railroad, finding the riding very fair.  from the
elevated road-bed i cast a longing, lingering look down the hudson valley,
that stretches away southward like a heaven-born dream, and sigh at the
impossibility of going two ways at once.  " there's $50 fine for riding
a bicycle along the b. & a.  railroad," i am informed at albany, but risk
it to schodack, where i make inquiries of a section foreman.  "no; there's
no foine; but av yeez are run over an' git killed, it'll be useless for
yeez to inther suit agin the company for damages," is the reassuring
reply; and the unpleasant visions of bankrupting fines dissolve in a
smile at this characteristic milesian explanation.  crossing the massachusetts
boundary at the village of state line, i find the roads excellent; and,
thinking that the highways of the " old bay state " will be good enough
anywhere, i grow careless about the minute directions given me by albany
wheelmen, and, ere long, am laboriously toiling over the heavy roads and
steep grades of the berkshire hills, endeavoring to get what consolation
i can, in return for unridable roads, out of the charming scenery, and
the many interesting features of the berkshire-hill country.  it is at
otis, in the midst of these hills, that i first become acquainted with
the peculiar new england dialect in its native home.  the widely heralded
intellectual superiority of the massachusetts fair ones asserts itself
even in the wildest parts of these wild hills; for at small farms - that,
in most states, would be characterized by bare-footed, brown-faced
housewives - i encounter spectacled ladies whose fair faces reflect the
encyclopaedia of knowledge within, and whose wise looks naturally fill
me with awe.  at westfield i learn that karl kron, the author and publisher
of the american roadbook, " ten thousand miles on a bicycle" - not to be
outdone by my exploit of floating the bicycle across the humboldt - undertook
the perilous feat of swimming the potomac with his bicycle suspended at
his waist, and had to be fished up from the bottom with a boat-hook.
since then, however, i have seen the gentleman himself, who assures me
that the whole story is a canard.  over good roads to springfield - and on
through to palmer; from thence riding the whole distance to worcester
between the tracks of the railway, in preference to the variable country
roads.

on to boston next morning, now only forty miles away, i pass venerable
weather-worn mile-stones, set up in old colonial days, when the great
west, now trailed across with the rubber hoof-marks of "the popular steed
of today," was a pathless wilderness, and on the maps a blank.  striking
the famous "sand-papered roads " at framingham - which, by the by, ought
to be pumice-stoned a little to make them as good for cycling as stretches
of gravelled road near springfield, sandwich, and piano, ill.; la porte,
and south bend, ind.; mentor, and willoughby, o.; girard, penn.; several
places on the ridge road between erie and buffalo, and the alkali flats
of the rocky mountain territories.  soon the blue intellectual haze
hovering over " the hub " heaves in sight, and, at two o'clock in the
afternoon of august 4th, i roll into boston, and whisper to the wild
waves of the sounding atlantic what the sad sea-waves of the pacific
were saying when i left there, just one hundred and three and a half
days ago, having wheeled about 3,700 miles to deliver the message.  passing
the winter of 1884-85 in new york, i became acquainted with the outing
magazine, contributed to it sketches of my tour across america, and in
the spring of 1885 continued around the world as its special correspondent;
embarking april 9th from new york, for liverpool, aboard the city of
chicago.






chapter v.





from america to the german frontier.

at one p.m., on that day, the ponderous but shapely hull of the city of
chicago, with its living and lively freight, moves from the dock as
though it, too, were endowed with mind as well with matter; the crowds that
a minute ago disappeared down the gangplank are now congregated on the
outer end of the pier, a compact mass of waving handkerchiefs, and
anxious-faced people shouting out signs of recognition to friends aboard
the departing steamer.

>from beginning to end of the voyage across the atlantic the weather is
delightful; and the passengers - well, half the cabin-passengers are members
of henry irving's lyceum company en route home after their second
successful tour in america; and old voyagers abroad who have crossed the
atlantic scores of times pronounce it altogether the most enjoyable trip
they ever experienced.  the third day out we encountered a lonesome-looking
iceberg - an object that the captain seemed to think would be better
appreciated, and possibly more affectionately remembered, if viewed at
the respectful distance of about four miles.  it proves a cold, unsympathetic
berg, yet extremely entertaining in its own way, since it accommodates
us by neutralizing pretty much all the surplus caloric in the atmosphere
around for hours after it has disappeared below the horizon of our vision.
i am particularly fortunate in finding among my fellow-passengers mr.
harry b. french, the traveller and author, from whom i obtain much
valuable information, particularly of china.  mr. french has travelled
some distance through the flowery kingdom himself, and thoughtfully
forewarns me to anticipate a particularly lively and interesting time
in invading that country with a vehicle so strange and incomprehensible
to the celestial mind as a bicycle.  this experienced gentleman informs
me, among other interesting things, that if five hundred chattering
celestials batter down the door and swarm unannounced at midnight into
the apartment where i am endeavoring to get the first wink of sleep
obtained for a whole week, instead of following the natural inclinations
of an anglosaxon to energetically defend his rights with a stuffed club,
i shall display solomon-like wisdom by quietly submitting to the invasion,
and deferentially bowing to chinese inquisitiveness.  if, on an occasion
of this nature, one stationed himself behind the door, and, as a sort
of preliminary warning to the others, greeted the first interloper with
the business end of a boot-jack, he would be morally certain of a lively
one-sided misunderstanding that might end disastrously to himself;
whereas, by meekly submitting to a critical and exhaustive examination
by the assembled company, he might even become the recipient of an apology
for having had to batter down the door in order to satisfy their curiosity.
one needs more discretion than valor in dealing with the chinese.  at
noon on the 19th we reach liverpool, where i find a letter awaiting me
from a. j. wilson (faed), inviting me to call on him at powerscroft
house, london, and offering to tandem me through the intricate mazes of
the west end; likewise asking whether it would be agreeable to have him,
with others, accompany me from london down to the south coast - a programme
to which, it is needless to say, i entertain no objections.  as the custom-
house officer wrenches a board off the broad, flat box containing my
american bicycle, several fellow-passengers, prompted by their curiosity
to obtain a peep at the machine which they have learned is to carry me
around the world, gather about; and one sympathetic lady, as she catches
a glimpse of the bright nickeled forks, exclaims, "oh, what a shame
that they should be allowed to wrench the planks off.  they might injure
it;" but a small tip thoroughly convinces the individual prying off the
board that, by removing one section and taking a conscientious squint
in the direction of the closed end, his duty to the british government
would be performed as faithfully as though everything were laid bare;
and the kind-hearted lady's apprehensions of possible injury are thus
happily allayed.  in two hours after landing, the bicycle is safely stowed
away in the underground store-rooms of the liverpool & northwestern
railway company, and in two hours more i am wheeling rapidly toward
london, through neatly cultivated fields, and meadows and parks of that
intense greenness met with nowhere save in the british isles, and which
causes a couple of native americans, riding in the same compartment, and
who are visiting england for the first time, to express their admiration
of it all in the unmeasured language of the genuine yankee when truly
astonished and delighted.  arriving in london i lose no time in seeking
out mr. bolton, a well-known wheelman, who has toured on the continent
probably as extensively as any other english cycler, and to whom i bear
a letter of introduction.  together, on monday afternoon, we ruthlessly
invade the sanctums of the leading cycling papers in london.  mr. bolton
is also able to give me several useful hints concerning wheeling through
france and germany.  then comes the application for a passport, and the
inevitable unpleasantness of being suspected by every policeman and
detective about the government buildings of being a wild-eyed dynamiter
recently arrived from america with the fell purpose of blowing up the
place.  on tuesday i make a formal descent on the chinese embassy, to
seek information regarding the possibility of making a serpentine trail
through the flowery kingdom via upper burmah to hong-kong or shanghai.
here i learn from dr.  mccarty, the interpreter at the embassy, as from
mr. french, that, putting it as mildly as possible, i must expect a wild
time generally in getting through the interior of china with a bicycle.
the doctor feels certain that i may reasonably anticipate the pleasure
of making my way through a howling wilderness of hooting celestials from
one end of the country to the other.  the great danger, he thinks, will
be not so much the well-known aversion of the chinese to having an
"outer barbarian" penetrate the sacred interior of their country, as the
enormous crowds that would almost constantly surround me out of curiosity
at both rider and wheel, and the moral certainty of a foreigner unwittingly
doing something to offend the chinamen's peculiar and deep-rooted notions
of propriety.  this, it is easily seen, would be a peculiarly ticklish
thing to do when surrounded by surging masses of dangling pig-tails and
cerulean blouses, the wearers of which are from the start predisposed
to make things as unpleasant as possible.  my own experience alone,
however, will prove the kind of reception i am likely to meet with among
them; and if they will only considerately refrain from impaling me on a
bamboo, after a barbarous and highly ingenious custom of theirs, i little
reck what other unpleasantries they have in store.  after one remains in
the world long enough to find it out, he usually becomes less fastidious
about the future of things in general, than when in the hopeful days of
boyhood every prospect ahead was fringed with the golden expectations
of a budding and inexperienced imagery; nevertheless, a thoughtful,
meditative person, who realizes the necessity of drawing the line
somewhere, would naturally draw it at impalation.  not being conscious
of any presentiment savoring of impalation, however, the only request i
make of the chinese, at present, is to place no insurmountable obstacle
against my pursuing the even-or uneven, as the case may be-tenor of my
way through their country.  china, though, is several revolutions of my
fifty-inch wheel away to the eastward, at this present time of writing,
and speculations in regard to it are rather premature.

soon after reaching london i have the pleasure of meeting "faed," a
gentleman who carries his cycling enthusiasm almost where some people
are said to carry their hearts-on his sleeve; so that a very short
acquaintance only is necessary to convince one of being in the company
of a person whose interest in whirling wheels is of no ordinary nature.
when i present myself at powerscroft house, faed is busily wandering
around among the curves and angles of no less than three tricycles,
apparently endeavoring to encompass the complicated mechanism of all
three in one grand comprehensive effort of the mind, and the addition
of as many tricycle crates standing around makes the premises so suggestive
of a flourishing tricycle agency that an old gentleman, happening to
pass by at the moment, is really quite excusable in stopping and inquiring
the prices, with a view to purchasing one for himself.  our tandem ride
through the west end has to be indefinitely postponed, on account of my
time being limited, and our inability to procure readily a suitable
machine; and mr. wilson's bump of discretion would not permit him to
think of allowing me to attempt the feat of manoeuvring a tricycle myself
among the bewildering traffic of the metropolis, and risk bringing my
"wheel around the world" to an inglorious conclusion before being fairly
begun.  while walking down parliament street my attention is called to a
venerable-looking gentleman wheeling briskly along among the throngs
of vehicles of every description, and i am informed that the bold tricycler
is none other than major knox holmes, a vigorous youth of some seventy-eight
summers, who has recently accomplished the feat of riding one hundred
and fourteen miles in ten hours; for a person nearly eighty years of age
this is really quite a promising performance, and there is small doubt
but that when the gallant major gets a little older - say when he becomes
a centenarian - he will develop into a veritable prodigy on the cinder-path!
having obtained my passport, and got it vised for the sultan's dominions
at the turkish consulate, and placed in faed's possession a bundle of
maps, which he generously volunteers to forward , to me, as i require
them in the various countries it is proposed to traverse, i return on
april 30th to liverpool, from which point the formal start on the wheel
across england is to be made.  four o'clock in the afternoon of may 2d
is the time announced, and edge hill church is the appointed place, where
mr. lawrence , fletcher, of the anfield bicycle club, and a number of
other liverpool wheelmen, have volunteered to meet and accompany me some
distance out of the city.  several of the liverpool daily papers have
made mention of the affair.  accordingly, upon arriving at the appointed
place and time, i find a crowd of several hundred people gathered to
satisfy their curiosity as to what sort of a looking individual it is
who has crossed america awheel, and furthermore proposes to accomplish
the greater feat of the circumlocution of the globe.  a small sea of hats
is enthusiastically waved aloft; a ripple of applause escapes from five
hundred english throats as i mount my glistening bicycle; and, with the
assistance of a few policemen, the twenty-five liverpool cyclers who
have assembled to accompany me out, extricate themselves from the crowd,
mount and fall into line two abreast; and merrily we wheel away down
edge lane and out of liverpool.

english weather at this season is notoriously capricious, and the present
year it is unusually so, and ere the start is fairly made we are pedaling
along through quite a pelting shower, which, however, fails to make much
impression on the roads beyond causing the flinging of more or less mud.
the majority of my escort are members of the anfield club, who have the
enviable reputation of being among the hardest road-riders in england,
several members having accomplished over two hundred miles within the
twenty-four hours; and i am informed that mr. fletcher is soon to undertake
the task of beating the tricycle record over that already well-contested
route, from john o'groat's to land's end.  sixteen miles out i become
the happy recipient of hearty well-wishes innumerable, with the accompanying
hand-shaking, and my escort turn back toward home and liverpool - all save
four, who wheel on to warrington and remain overnight, with the avowed
intention of accompanying me twenty-five miles farther to-morrow morning.
our sunday morning experience begins with a shower of rain, which,
however, augurs well for the remainder of the day; and, save for a gentle
head wind, no reproachful remarks are heard about that much-criticised
individual, the clerk of the weather; especially as our road leads through
a country prolific of everything charming to one's sense of the beautiful.
moreover, we are this morning bowling along the self-same highway that
in days of yore was among the favorite promenades of a distinguished and
enterprising individual known to every british juvenile as dick turpin - a
person who won imperishable renown, and the undying affection of the
small briton of to-day, by making it unsafe along here for stage-coaches
and travellers indiscreet enough to carry valuables about with them.

"think i'll get such roads as this all through england." i ask of my
escort as we wheel joyously southward along smooth, macadamized highways
that would make the "sand-papered roads" around boston seem almost
unfit for cycling in comparison, and that lead through picturesque
villages and noble parks; occasionally catching a glimpse of a splendid
old manor among venerable trees, that makes one unconsciously begin
humming:- "the ancient homes of england, how beautiful they stand amidst
the tall ancestral trees o'er all the pleasant land." "oh, you'll get
much better roads than this in the southern counties," is the reply;
though, fresh from american roads, one can scarce see what shape the
improvements can possibly take.  out of lancashire into cheshire we wheel,
and my escort, after wishing me all manner of good fortune in hearty
lancashire style, wheel about and hie themselves back toward the rumble
and roar of the world's greatest sea-port, leaving me to pedal pleasantly
southward along the green lanes and amid the quiet rural scenery of
staffordshire to stone, where i remain sunday night.  the country is
favored with another drenching down-pour of rain during the night, and
moisture relentlessly descends at short, unreliable intervals on monday
morning, as i proceed toward birmingham.  notwithstanding the superabundant
moisture the morning ride is a most enjoyable occasion, requiring but a
dash of sunshine to make everything perfect.  the mystic voice of the
cuckoo is heard from many an emerald copse around; songsters that inhabit
only the green hedges and woods of "merrie england" are carolling their
morning vespers in all directions; skylarks are soaring, soaring skyward,
warbling their unceasing paeans of praise as they gradually ascend into
cloudland's shadowy realms; and occasionally i bowl along beneath an
archway of spreading beeches that are colonized by crowds of noisy rooks
incessantly "cawing" their approval or disapproval of things in general.
surely england, with its wellnigh perfect roads, the wonderful greenness
of its vegetation, and its roadsters that meet and regard their steel-ribbed
rivals with supreme indifference, is the natural paradise of 'cyclers.
there is no annoying dismounting for frightened horses on these happy
highways, for the english horse, though spirited and brim-ful of fire,
has long since accepted the inevitable, and either has made friends with
the wheelman and his swift-winged steed, or, what is equally agreeable,
maintain a a haughty reserve.  pushing along leisurely, between showers,
into warwickshire, i reach birmingham about three o'clock, and, after
spending an hour or so looking over some tricycle works, and calling for
a leather writing-case they are making especially for my tour, i wheel
on to coventry, having the company, of mr. priest, jr., of the tricycle
works, as far as stonehouse.  between birmingham and coventry the recent
rainfall has evidently been less, and i mentally note this fifteen-mile
stretch of road as the finest traversed since leaving liverpool, both
for width and smoothness of surface, it being a veritable boulevard.
arriving at coventry i call on "brother sturmey, " a gentleman well and
favorably known to readers of 'cycling literature everywhere; and, as i
feel considerably like deserving reasonably gentle treatment after
perseveringly pressing forward sixty miles in spite of the rain, i request
him to steer me into the cyclists' touring club hotel - an office which
he smilingly performs, and thoughtfully admonishes the proprietor to
handle me as tenderly as possible.  i am piloted around to take a hurried
glance at coventry, visiting, among other objects of interest, the starley
memorial.  this memorial is interesting to 'cyclers from having been
erected by public subscription in recognition of the great interest mr.
starley took in the 'cycle industry, he having been, in fact, the father
of the interest in coventry, and, consequently, the direct author of the
city's present prosperity.  the mind of the british small boy along my
route has been taxed to its utmost to account for my white military
helmet, and various and interesting are the passing remarks heard in
consequence.  the most general impression seems to be that i am direct
from the soudan, some youthful conservatives blandly intimating the
starley memorial, coventry, that i am the advance-guard of a general
scuttle of the army out of egypt, and that presently whole regiments of
white-helmeted wheelmen will come whirling along the roads on
nickel-plated steeds, some even going so far as to do me the honor of
calling me general wolseley; while others - rising young liberals,
probably - recklessly call me general gordon, intimating by this that the
hero of khartoum was not killed, after all, and is proving it by sweeping
through england on a bicycle, wearing a white helmet to prove his identity!

a pleasant ride along a splendid road, shaded for miles with rows of
spreading elms, brings me to the charming old village of dunchurch, where
everything seems moss-grown and venerable with age.  a squatty,
castle-like church-tower, that has stood the brunt of many
centuries, frowns down upon a cluster of picturesque, thatched
cottages of primitive architecture, and ivy-clad from top to bottom;
while, to make the picture complete, there remain even the old wooden
stocks, through the holes of which the feet of boozy unfortunates were
wont to be unceremoniously thrust in the good old times of rude simplicity;
in fact, the only really unprimitive building about the place appears
to be a newly erected methodist chapel.  it couldn't be - no, of course it
couldn't be possible, that there is any connecting link between the
american peculiarity of elevating the feet on the window-sill or the
drum of the heating-stove and this old-time custom of elevating the feet
of those of our ancestors possessed of boozy, hilarious proclivities!
at weedon barracks i make a short halt to watch the soldiers go through
the bayonet exercises, and suffer myself to be persuaded into quaffing
a mug of delicious, creamy stout at the canteen with a genial old sergeant,
a bronzed veteran who has seen active service in several of the tough
expeditions that england seems ever prone to undertake in various
uncivilized quarters of the world; after which i wheel away over old
roman military roads, through northamptonshire and buckinghamshire,
reaching fenny stratford just in time to find shelter against the
machinations of the "weather-clerk", who, having withheld rain nearly all
the afternoon, begins dispensing it again in the gloaming.  it rains
uninterruptedly all night; but, although my route for some miles is now
down cross-country lanes, the rain has only made them rather disagreeable,
without rendering them in any respect unridable; and although i am among
the slopes of the chiltern hills, scarcely a dismount is necessary during
the forenoon.  spending the night at berkhamstead, hertfordshire, i pull
out toward london on thursday morning, and near watford am highly gratified
at meeting faed and the captain of the north london tricycle club, who
have come out on their tricycles from london to meet and escort me into
the metropolis.  at faed's suggestion i decide to remain over in london
until saturday to be present at the annual tricycle meet on barnes common,
and together we wheel down the edgeware road, park road, among the
fashionable turnouts of piccadilly, past knightsbridge and brompton to
the "inventories" exhibition, where we spend a most enjoyable afternoon
inspecting the thousand and one material evidences of inventive genius
from the several countries represented.

five hundred and twelve 'cyclers, including forty-one tandem tricycles
and fifty ladies, ride in procession at the barnes common meet, making
quite an imposing array as they wheel two abreast between rows of
enthusiastic spectators.  here, among a host of other wheeling celebrities,
i am introduced to major knox holmes, before mentioned as being a gentleman
of extraordinary powers of endurance, considering his advanced age.  after
tea a number of tricyclers accompany me down as far as croydon, which
place we enter to the pattering music of a drenching rain-storm,
experiencing the accompanying pleasure of a wet skin, etc.  the threatening
aspect of the weather on the following morning causes part of our company
to hesitate about venturing any farther from london; but faed and three
companions wheel with me toward brighton through a gentle morning shower,
which soon clears away, however, and, before long, the combination of
the splendid sussex roads, fine breezy weather, and lovely scenery, amply
repays us for the discomforts of yester-eve.  fourteen miles from brighton
we are met by eight members of the kempton rangers bicycle club, who
have sallied forth thus far northward to escort us into town; having
done which, they deliver us over to mr. c---, of the brighton tricycle
club, and brother-in-law to the mayor of the city.  it is two in the
afternoon.  this gentleman straightway ingratiates himself into our united
affections, and wins our eternal gratitude, by giving us a regular
wheelman's dinner, after which he places us under still further obligations
by showing us as many of the lions of brighton as are accessible on
sunday, chief among which is the famous brighton aquarium, where, by his
influence, he kindly has the diving-birds and seals fed before their
usual hour, for our especial delectation-a proceeding which naturally
causes the barometer of our respective self-esteems to rise several
notches higher than usual, and doubtless gives equal satisfaction to the
seals and diving-birds.  we linger at the aquarium until near sun-down,
and it is fifteen miles by what is considered the smoothest road to
newhaven.  mr. c---- declares his intention of donning his riding-suit
and, by taking a shorter, though supposably rougher, road, reach newhaven
as soon as we.  as we halt at lewes for tea, and ride leisurely, likewise
submitting to being photographed en route, he actually arrives there
ahead of us.  it is sunday evening, may 10th, and my ride through "merrie
england " is at an end.  among other agreeable things to be ever remembered
in connection with it is the fact that it is the first three hundred
miles of road i ever remember riding over without scoring a header - a
circumstance that impresses itself none the less favorably perhaps when
viewed in connection with the solidity of the average english road.  it
is not a very serious misadventure to take a flying header into a bed
of loose sand on an american country road; but the prospect of rooting
up a flint-stone with one's nose, or knocking a curb-stone loose with
one's bump of cautiousness, is an entirely different affair; consequently,
the universal smoothness of the surface of the english highways is
appreciated at its full value by at least one wheelman whose experience
of roads is nothing if not varied.  comfortable quarters are assigned me
on board the channel steamer, and a few minutes after bidding friends
and england farewell, at newhaven, at 11.30 p.m., i am gently rocked
into unconsciousness by the motion of the vessel, and remain happily and
restfully oblivious to my surroundings until awakened next morning at
dieppe, where i find myself, in a few minutes, on a foreign shore.  all
the way from san francisco to newhaven. there is a consciousness of being
practically in one country and among one people-people who, though
acknowledging separate governments, are bound so firmly together by the
ties of common instincts and interests, and the mystic brotherhood of a
common language and a common civilization, that nothing of a serious
nature can ever come between them.  but now i am verily among strangers,
and the first thing talked of is to make me pay duty on the bicycle.

the captain of the vessel, into whose hands mr. c---- assigned me at
newhaven, protests on my behalf, and i likewise enter a gentle demurrer;
but the custom-house officer declares that a duty will have to be
forthcoming, saying that the amount will be returned again when i pass
over the german frontier.  the captain finally advises the payment of the
duty and the acceptance of a receipt for the amount, and takes his leave.
not feeling quite satisfied as yet about paying the duty, i take a short
stroll about dieppe, leaving my wheel at tho custom-house and when i
shortly return, prepared to pay the assessment, whatever it may be, the
officer who, but thirty minutes since, declared emphatically in favor
of a duty, now answers, with all the politeness imaginable: "monsieur
is at liberty to take the velocipede and go whithersoever he will." it
is a fairly prompt initiation into the impulsiveness of the french
character.  they don't accept bicycles as baggage, though, on the channel
steamers, and six shillings freight, over and above passage-money, has
to be yielded up.

although upon a foreign shore, i am not yet, it seems, to be left entirely
alone to the tender mercies of my own lamentable inability to speak
french.  fortunately there lives at dieppe a gentleman named mr. parkinson,
who, besides being an englishman to the backbone, is quite an enthusiastic
wheelman, and, among other things, considers it his solemn duty to take
charge of visiting 'cyclers from england and america and see them safely
launched along the magnificent roadways of normandy, headed fairly toward
their destination.  faed has thoughtfully notified mr. parkinson of my
approach, and he is watching for my coming - as tenderly as though i were
a returning prodigal and he charged with my welcoming home.  close under
the frowning battlements of dieppe castle - a once wellnigh impregnable
fortress that was some time in possession of the english - romantically
nestles mr. parldnson's studio, and that genial gentleman promptly
proposes accompanying me some distance into the country.  on our way
through dieppe i notice blue-bloused peasants guiding small flocks of
goats through the streets, calling them along with a peculiar, tuneful
instrument that sounds somewhat similar to a bagpipe.  i learn that they
are normandy peasants, who keep their flocks around town all summer,
goat's milk being considered beneficial for infants and invalids.  they
lead the goats from house to house, and milk whatever quantity their
customers want at their own door - a custom that we can readily understand
will never become widely popular among anglosaxon milkmen, since it
leaves no possible chance for pump-handle combinations and corresponding
profits.  the morning is glorious with sunshine and the carols of feathered
songsters as together we speed away down the beautiful arques valley,
over roads that are simply perfect for wheeling; and, upon arriving at
the picturesque ruins of the chateau d'arques, we halt and take a casual
peep at the crumbling walls of this of the famous fortress, which the
trailing ivy of normandy now partially covers with a dark-green mantle
of charity, as though its purpose and its mission were to hide its fallen
grandeur from the rude gaze of the passing stranger.  all along the roads
we meet happy-looking peasants driving into dieppe market with produce.
they are driving normandy horses - and that means fine, large, spirited
animals - which, being unfamiliar with bicycles, almost invariably take
exception to ours, prancing about after the usual manner of high-strung
steeds.  unlike his english relative, the norman horse looks not supinely
upon the whirling wheel, but arrays himself almost unanimously against
us, and umially in the most uncompromising manner, similar to the phantom-
eyed roadster of the united states agriculturist.  the similarity between
the turnouts of these two countries i am forced to admit, however,
terminates abruptly with the horse itself, and does not by any means
extend to the driver; for, while the normandy horse capers about and
threatens to upset the vehicle into the ditch, the frenchman's face is
wreathed in apologetic smiles; and, while he frantically endeavors to
keep the refractory horse under control, he delivers himself of a whole
dictionary of apologies to the wheelman for the animal's foolish conduct,
touches his cap with an air of profound deference upon noticing that we
have considerately slowed up, and invariably utters his bon jour, monsieur,
as we wheel past, in a voice that plainly indicates his acknowledgment
of the wheelman's - or anybody else's - right to half the roadway.  a few
days ago i called the english roads perfect, and england the paradise
of 'cyclers; and so it is; but the normandy roads are even superior, and
the scenery of the arques valley is truly lovely.  there is not a loose
stone, a rut, or depression anywhere on these roads, and it is little
exaggeration to call them veritable billiard-tables for smoothness of
surface.  as one bowls smoothly along over them he is constantly wondering
how they can possibly keep them in such condition.  were these fine roads
in america one would never be out of sight of whirling wheels.  a luncheon
of normandy cheese and cider at cleres, and then onward to bouen is the
word.  at every cross-roads is erected an iron guide-post, containing
directions to several of the nearest towns, telling the distances in
kilometres and yards; and small stone pillars are set up alongside the
road, marking every hundred yards.  arriving at rouen at four o'clock,
mr. parkiuson shows me the famous old rouen cathedral, the palace of
justice, and such examples of old mediaeval rouen as i care to visit,
and, after inviting me to remain and take dinner with him by the murmuring
waters of the historic seine, he bids me bon voyage, turns my head
southward, and leaves me at last a stranger among strangers, to "cornprendre
franyais" unassisted.  some wiseacre has placed it on record that too
much of a good thing is worse than none at all; however that may be,
from having concluded that the friendly iron guide-posts would be found
on every corner where necessary, pointing out the way with infallible
truthfulness, and being doubtless influenced by the superior levelness
of the road leading down the valley of the seine in comparison with the
one leading over the bluffs, i wander toward eventide into elbeuf, instead
of pont de l' arques, as i had intended; but it matters little, and i
am content to make the best of my surroundings.  wheeling along the
crooked, paved streets of elbeuf, i enter a small hotel, and, after the
customary exchange of civilities, i arch my eyebrows at an intelligent
-looking madaine, and inquire, " comprendre anglais." "non," replies
the lady, looking puzzled, while i proceed to ventilate my pantomimic
powers to try and make my wants understood.  after fifteen minutes of
despairing effort, mademoiselle, the daughter, is despatched to the other
side of the town, and presently returns with a be whiskered frenchman,
who, in very much broken english, accompanying his words with wondrous
gesticulations, gives me to understand that he is the only person in all
elbeuf capable of speaking the english language, and begs me to unburden
myself to him without reserve.  he proves himself useful and obliging,
kindly interesting himself in obtaining me comfortable accommodation at
reasonable rates.  this elbeuf hotel, though, is anything but an elegant
establishment, and le proprietaire, though seemingly intelligent enough,
brings me out a bottle of the inevitable vin ordinaire (common red wine)
at breakfast-time, instead of the coffee for which my opportune interpreter
said he had given the order yester-eve.  if a frenchman only sits down
to a bite of bread and cheese he usually consumes a pint bottle of vin
ordinaire with it.  the loaves of bread here are rolls three and four
feet long, and frequently one of these is laid across - or rather along,
for it is oftentimes longer than the table is wide - the table for you to
hack away at during your meal, according to your bread-eating capacity
or inclination.

monsieur, the accomplished, come down to see his anglais friend and
protege next morning, a few minutes after his anglais friend and protege,
has started off toward a distant street called rue poussen, which le
garcon had unwittingly directed him to when he inquired the way to the
bureau de poste; the natural result, i suppose, of the difference between
elbeuf pronunciation and mine.  discovering my mistake upon arriving at
the rue poussen, i am more fortunate in my attack upon the interpreting
abilities of a passing citizen, who sends an elbeuf gamin to guide me
to the post-office.

post office clerks are proverbially intelligent people in any country,
consequently it doesn't take me long to transact my business at the
bureau de poste; but now - shades of caesar! - i have thoughtlessly
neglected to take down either the name of the hotel or the street in
which it is located, and for the next half-hour go wandering about as
helplessly as the "babes in the wood" once, twice i fancy recognizing
the location; but the ordinary elbeuf house is not easily recognized
from its neighbors, and i am standing looking around me in the
bewildered attitude of one uncertain of his bearings, when, lo! the
landlady, who has doubtless been wondering whatever has become
of me, appears at the door of a building which i should certainly never
have recognized as my hotel, besom in hand, and her pleasant, "oui,
monsieur," sounds cheery and welcome enough, under the circumstances,
as one may readily suppose.

fine roads continue, and between gaillon and vernon one can see the
splendid highway, smooth, straight, and broad, stretching ahead for miles
between rows of stately poplars, forming magnificent avenues that add
not a little to the natural loveliness of the country.  noble chateaus
appear here and there, oftentimes situated upon the bluffs of the seine,
and forming the background to a long avenue of chestnuts, maples, or
poplars, running at right angles to the main road and principal avenue.
the well-known thriftincss of the french peasantry is noticeable on every
hand, and particularly away off to the left yonder, where their small,
well-cultivated farms make the sloping bluffs resemble huge log-cabin
quilts in the distance.  another glaring and unmistakable evidence of the
normandy peasants' thriftiness is the remarkable number of patches they
manage to distribute over the surface of their pantaloons, every peasant
hereabouts averaging twenty patches, more or less, of all shapes and
sizes.  when the british or united states governments impose any additional
taxation on the people, the people gruinblingly declare they won't put
up with it, and then go ahead and pay it; but when the chamber of deputies
at paris turns on the financial thumb-screw a little tighter, the french
peasant simply puts yet another patch on the seat of his pantaloons, and
smilingly hands over the difference between the patch and the new pair
he intended to purchase!

huge cavalry barracks mark the entrance to vernon, and, as i watch with
interest the manoauvring of the troops going through their morning drill,
i cannot help thinking that with such splendid loads as france possesses
she might take many a less practical measure for home defence than to
mount a few regiments of light infantry on bicycles; infantry travelling
toward the front at the late of seventy-five or a hundred miles a day
would be something of an improvement, one would naturally think.  every
few miles my road leads through the long, straggling street of a village,
every building in which is of solid stone, and looks at least a thousand
years old; while at many cross-roads among the fields, and in all manner
of unexpected nooks and corners of the villages, crucifixes are erected
to accommodate the devotionally inclined.  most of the streets of these
interior villages are paved with square stones which the wear and tear
of centuries have generally rendered too rough for the bicycle; but
occasionally one is ridable, and the astonishment of the inhabitants as
i wheel leisurely through, whistling the solemn strains of "roll, jordan,
roll," is really quite amusing.  every village of any size boasts a church
that, for fineness of architecture and apparent costliness of construction,
looks out of all proportion to the straggling street of shapeless
structures that it overtops.  everything here seems built as though
intended to last forever, it being no unusual sight to see a ridiculously
small piece of ground surrounded by a stone wall built as though to
resist a bombardment; an enclosure that must have cost more to erect
than fifty crops off the enclosed space could repay.  the important town
of mantes is reached early in the evening, and a good inn found for the
night.

the market-women are arraying their varied wares all along the main
street of mantes as i wheel down toward the banks of the seine this
morning.  i stop to procure a draught of new milk, and, while drinking
it, point to sundry long rows of light, flaky-looking cakes strung on
strings, and motion that i am desirous of sampling a few at current
rates; but the good dame smiles and shakes her head vigorously, as well
enough she might, for i learn afterward that the cakes are nothing less
than dried yeast-cakes, a breakfast off which would probably have produced
spontaneous combustion.  getting on to the wrong road out of mantes, i
find myself at the river's edge down among the seine watermen.  i am shown
the right way, but from mantes to paris they are not normandy roads;
from mantes southward they gradually deteriorate until they are little
or no better than the "sand-papered roads of boston." having determined
to taboo vin ordinaire altogether i astonish the restaurateur of a village
where i take lunch by motioning away the bottle of red wine and calling
for " de i'eau," and the glances cast in my direction by the other
customers indicate plainly enough that they consider the proceeding as
something quite extraordinary.  rolling through saint germain, chalon
pavey, and nanterre, the magnificent arc de triomphe looms up in the
distance ahead, and at about two o'clock, wednesday, may 13th, i wheel
into the gay capital through the porte maillott.  asphalt pavement now
takes the place of macadam, and but a short distance inside the city
limits i notice the 'cycle depot of renard ferres.  knowing instinctively
that the fraternal feelings engendered by the magic wheel reaches to
wherever a wheelman lives, i hesitate not to dismount and present my
card.  yes, jean glinka, apparently an employe there, comprehends anglais;
they have all heard of my tour, and wish me bon voyage, and jean and his
bicycle is forthwith produced and delegated to accompany me into the
interior of the city and find me a suitable hotel.  the streets of paris,
like the streets of other large cities, are paved with various compositions,
and they have just been sprinkled.  french-like, the luckless jean is
desirous of displaying his accomplishments on the wheel to a visitor so
distingue; he circles around on the slippery pavement in a manner most
unnecessary, and in so doing upsets himself while crossing a car-track,
rips his pantaloons, and injures his wheel.  at the hotel du louvre they
won't accept bicycles, having no place to put them; but a short distance
from there we find a less pretentious establishment, where, after requiring
me to fill up a formidable-looking blank, stating my name, residence,
age, occupation, birthplace, the last place i lodged at, etc., they
finally assign me quarters.  from paul devilliers, to whom i bring an
introduction, i learn that by waiting here till friday evening, and
repairing to the rooms of the societe velocipedique metropolitaine, the
president of that club can give me the best bicycle route between paris
and vienna; accordingly i domicile myself at the hotel for a couple of
days.  many of the lions of paris are within easy distance of my hotel.
the reader, however, probably knows more about the sights of paris than
one can possibly find out in two days; therefore i refrain from any
attempt at describing them; but my hotel is worthy of remark.

among other agreeable and sensible arrangements at the hotel uu loiret,
there is no such thing as opening one's room-door from the outside save
with the key; and unless one thoroughly understands this handy peculiarity,
and has his wits about him continually, he is morally certain, sometime
when he is leaving his room, absent-mindedly to shut the door and leave
the key inside.  this is, of course, among the first things that happen
to me, and it costs me half a franc and three hours of wretchedness
before i see the interior of my room again.  the hotel keeps a rude
skeleton-key on hand, presumably for possible emergencies of this nature;
but in manipulating this uncouth instrument le portier actually locks
the door, and as the skeleton-key is expected to manage the catch only,
and not the lock, this, of course, makes matters infinitely worse.  the
keys of every room in the house are next brought into requisition and
tried in succession, but not a key among them all is a duplicate of mine.
what is to be done.  le portier looks as dejected as though paris was
about to be bombarded, as he goes down and breaks the dreadful news to
le proprietaire.  up comes le proprietaire - avoirdupois three hundred
pounds - sighing like an exhaust-pipe at every step.  for fifteen unhappy
minutes the skeleton-key is wriggled and twisted about again in the key-
hole, and the fat proprietaire rubs his bald head impatiently, but all
to no purpose.  each returns to his respective avocation.  impatient to
get at my writing materials, i look up at the iron bars across the fifth-
story windows above, and motion that if they will procure a rope i will
descend from thence and enter the window.  they one and all point out
into the street; and, thinking they have sent for something or somebody,
i sit down and wait with job-like patience for something to turn up.
nothing, however, turns up, and at the expiration of an hour i naturally
begin to feel neglected and impatient, and again suggest the rope; when,
at a motion from le proprietaire, le portier pilots me around a neighboring
corner to a locksmith's establishment, where, voluntarily acting the part
of interpreter, he engages on my behalf, for half a franc, a man to come
with a bunch of at least a hundred skeleton-keys of all possible shapes
to attack the refractory key-hole.  after trying nearly all the keys, and
disburdening himself of whole volumes of impulsive french ejaculations,
this man likewise gives it up in despair; but, now everything else has
been tried and failed, the countenance of la portier suddenly lights up,
and he slips quietly around to an adjoining room, and enters mine inside
of two minutes by simply lifting a small hook out of a staple with his
knife-blade.  there appears to be a slight coolness, as it were, between
le proprietaire and me after this incident, probably owing to the
intellectual standard of each becoming somewhat lowered in the other's
estimation in consequence of it.  le proprietaire, doubtless, thinks a
man capable of leaving the key inside of the door must be the worst type
of an ignoramus; and certainly my opinion of him for leaving such a
diabolical arrangement unchanged in the latter half of the nineteenth
century is not far removed from the same.

visiting the headquarters of the societe velocipedique mctropolitaine
on friday evening, i obtain from the president the desired directions
regarding the route, and am all prepared to continue eastward in the
morning.  wheeling down the famous champs elysees at eleven at night,
when the concert gardens are in full blast and everything in a blaze,
of glory, with myriads of electric lights festooned and in long brilliant
rows among the trees, is something to be remembered for a lifetime.
before breakfast i leave the city by the porte daumesiul, and wheel
through the environments toward vincennes and jonville, pedalling, to
the sound of martial music, for miles beyond the porte.  the roads for
thirty miles east of paris are not normandy roads, but the country for
most of the distance is fairly level, and for mile after mile, and league
beyond league, the road is beneath avenues of plane and poplar, which,
crossing the plain in every direction like emerald walls of nature's own
building, here embellish and beautify an otherwise rather monotonous
stretch of country.  the villages are little different from the villages
of normandy, but the churches have not the architectural beauty of the
normandy churches, being for the most part massive structures without
any pretence to artistic embellishment in their construction.  monkish-looking
priests are a characteristic feature of these villages, and when, on
passing down the narrow, crooked streets of fontenay, i wheel beneath a
massive stone archway, and looking around, observe cowled priests and
everything about the place seemingly in keeping with it, one can readily
imagine himself transported back to medieval times.  one of these little
interior french villages is the most unpromising looking place imaginable
for a hungry person to ride into; often one may ride the whole length
of the village expectantly looking around for some visible evidence of
wherewith to cheer the inner man, and all that greets the hungry vision
is a couple of four-foot sticks of bread in one dust-begrimed window,
and a few mournful-looking crucifixes and roman catholic paraphernalia
in another.  neither are the peasants hereabouts to be compared with the
normandy peasantry in personal appearance.  true, they have as many patches
on their pantaloons, but they don't seem to have acquired the art of
attaching them in a manner to produce the same picturesque effect as
does the peasant of normandy; the original garment is almost invariably
a shapeless corduroy, of a bagginess and an o'er-ampleness most unbeautiful
to behold.

the well-known axiom about fair paths leading astray holds good with the
high-ways and by-ways of france, as elsewhere, and soon after leaving
the ancient town of provins, i am tempted by a splendid road, following
the windings of a murmuring brook, that appears to be going in my
direction, in consequence of which i soon find myself among cross-country
by-ways, and among peasant proprietors who apparently know little of the
world beyond their native tillages.  four o'clock finds me wheeling through
a hilly vineyard district toward villenauxe, a town several kilometres
off my proper route, from whence a dozen kilometres over a very good
road brings me to sezanne, where the hotel de france affords excellent
accommodation.  after the table d'hote the clanging bells of the old
church hard by announce services of some kind, and having a natural
penchant when in strange places from wandering whithersoever inclination
leads, in anticipation of the ever possible item of interest, i meander
into the church and take a seat.  there appears to be nothing extraordinary
about the service, the only unfamiliar feature to me being a man wearing
a uniform similar to the gendarmerie of paris: cockade, sash, sword, and
everything complete; in addition to which he carries a large cane and a
long brazen-headed staff resembling the boarding-pike of the last century.
it has rained heavily during the night, but the roads around here are
composed mainly of gravel, and are rather improved than otherwise by the
rain; and from sezanne, through champenoise and on to vitry le francois,
a distance of about sixty-five kilometres, is one of the most enjoyable
stretches of road imaginable.  the contour of the country somewhat resembles
the swelling prairies of western iowa, and the roads are as perfect for
most of the distance as an asphalt boulevard.  the hills are gradual
acclivities, and, owing to the good roads, are mostly ridable, while -
the declivities make the finest coasting imaginable; the exhilaration
of gliding down them in the morning air, fresh after the rain, can be
compared only to canadian tobogganing.  ahead of you stretches a gradual
downward slope, perhaps two kilometres long.  knowing full well that from
top to bottom there exists not a loose stone or a dangerous spot, you
give the ever-ready steel-horse the rein; faster and faster whirl the
glistening wheels until objects "by the road-side become indistinct
phantoms as they glide instantaneously by, and to strike a hole or
obstruction is to be transformed into a human sky-rocket, and, later on,
into a new arrival in another world.  a wild yell of warning at a blue-
bloused peasant in the road ahead, shrill screams of dismay from several
females at a cluster of cottages, greet the ear as you sweep past like
a whirlwind, and the next moment reach the bottom at a rate of speed
that would make the engineer of the flying dutchman green with envy.
sometimes, for the sake of variety, when gliding noiselessly along on
the ordinary level, i wheel unobserved close up behind an unsuspecting
peasant walking on ahead, without calling out, and when he becomes
conscious of my presence and looks around and sees the strange vehicle
in such close proximity it is well worth the price of a new hat to see
the lively manner in which he hops out of the way, and the next moment
becomes fairly rooted to the ground with astonishment; for bicycles and
bicycle riders are less familiar objects to the french peasant, outside
of the neighborhood of a few large cities, than one would naturally
suppose.

vitry le frangois is a charming old town in the beautiful valley of the
marne; in the middle ages it was a strongly fortified city; the moats
and earth-works are still perfect.  the only entrance to the town, even
now, is over the old draw-bridges, the massive gates, iron wheels, chains,
etc., still being intact, so that the gates can yet be drawn up and
entrance denied to foes, as of yore; but the moats are now utilized for
the boats of the marne and rhine canal, and it is presumable that the
old draw-bridges are nowadays always left open.  to-day is sunday - and
sunday in france is equivalent to a holiday - consequently vitry le frangois,
being quite an important town, and one of the business centres of the
prosperous and populous marne valley, presents all the appearance of
circus-day in an american agricultural community.  several booths are
erected in the market square, the proprietors and attaches of two
peregrinating theatres, several peep-shows, and a dozen various games
of chance, are vying with each other in the noisiness of their demonstrations
to attract the attention and small change of the crowd to their respective
enterprises.  like every other highway in this part of france the marne
and bhine canal is fringed with an avenue of poplars, that from neighboring
elevations can be seen winding along the beautiful valley for miles,
presenting a most pleasing effect.

east of vitry le francois the roads deteriorate, and from thence to bar-
le they are inferior to any hitherto encountered in france; nevertheless,
from the american standpoint they are very good roads, and when, at five
o'clock, i wheel into bar-le-duc and come to sum up the aggregate of the
day's journey i find that, without any undue exertion, i have covered
very nearly one hundred and sixty kilometres, or about one hundred english
miles, since 8.30 a.m., notwithstanding a good hour's halt at vitry le
francois for dinner.  bar-le-duc appears to be quite an important business
centre, pleasantly situated in the valley of the ornain river, a tributary
of the marne; and the stream, in its narrow, fertile valley, winds around
among hills from whose sloping sides, every autumn, fairly ooze the
celebrated red wines of the meuse and moselle regions.  the valley has
been favored with a tremendous downpour of rain and hail during the
night, and the partial formation of the road leading along the level
valley eastward being a light-colored, slippery clay, i find it anything
but agreeable wheeling this morning; moreover, the ornain valley road
is not so perfectly kept as it might be.  as in every considerable town
in france, so also in bar-le-duc, the military element comes conspicuously
to the fore.  eleven kilometres of slipping and sliding through the greasy
clay brings me to the little village of tronville, where i halt to
investigate the prospect of obtaining something to eat.  as usual, the
prospect, from the street, is most unpromising, the only outward evidence
being a few glass jars of odds and ends of candy in one small window.
entering this establishment, the only thing the woman can produce besides
candy and raisins is a box of brown, wafer-like biscuits, the unsubstantial
appearance of which is, to say the least, most unsatisfactory to a person
who has pedalled his breakfastless way through eleven kilometres of
slippery clay.  uncertain of their composition, and remembering my unhappy
mistake at mantes in desiring to breakfast off yeast-cakes, i take the
precaution of sampling one, and in the absence of anything more substantial
conclude to purchase a few, and so motion to the woman to hand me the
box in order that i can show her how many i want.  but the o'er-careful
frenchwoman, mistaking my meaning, and fearful that i only want to sample
yet another one, probably feeling uncertain of whether i might not wish
to taste a whole handful this time, instead of handing it over moves it
out of my reach altogether, meanwhile looking quite angry, and not a
little mystified at her mysterious, pantomimic customer.  a half-franc
is produced, and, after taking the precaution of putting it away in
advance, the cautious female weighs me out the current quantity of her
ware; and i notice that, after giving lumping weight, she throws in a
few extra, presumably to counterbalance what, upon sober second thought,
she perceives to have been an unjust suspicion.  while i am extracting
what satisfaction my feathery purchase contains, it begins to rain and
hail furiously, and so continues with little interruption all the forenoon,
compelling me, much against my inclination, to search out in tronville,
if possible, some accommodation till to-morrow morning.  the village is
a shapeless cluster of stone houses and stables, the most prominent
feature of the streets being huge heaps of manure and grape-vine prunings;
but i manage to obtain the necessary shelter, and such other accommodations
as might be expected in an out-of-the-way village, unfrequented by
visitors from one year's end to another.  the following morning is still
rainy, and the clayey roads of the ornain valley are anything but inviting
wheeling; but a longer stay in tronville is not to be thought of, for,
among other pleasantries of the place here, the chief table delicacy
appears to be boiled escargots, a large, ungainly snail procured from
the neighboring hills.  whilst fond of table delicacies, i emphatically
draw the line at escargots.  pulling out toward toul i find the roads,
as expected, barely ridable; but the vineyard-environed little valley,
lovely in its tears, wrings from one praise in spite of muddy roads and
lowering weather.  en route down the valley i meet a battery of artillery
travelling from toul to bar-le duc or some other point to the westward;
and if there is any honor in throwing a battery of french artillery into
confusion, and wellnigh routing them, then the bicycle and i are fairly
entitled to it.

as i ride carelessly toward them, the leading horses suddenly wheel
around and begin plunging about the road.  the officers' horses, and, in
fact, the horses of the whole company, catch the infection, and there
is a plunging and a general confusion all along the line, seeing which
i, of course, dismount and retire - but not discomfited - from the field
until they have passed.  these french horses are certainly not more than
half-trained.  i passed a battery of english artillery on the road leading
out of coventry, and had i wheeled along under the horses' noses there
would have been no confusion whatever.

on the divide between the ornain and moselle valleys the roads are
hillier, but somewhat less muddy.  the weather continues showery and
unsettled, and a short distance beyond void i find myself once again
wandering off along the wrong road.  the peasantry hereabout seem to have
retained a lively recollection of the prussians, my helmet appearing to
have the effect of jogging their memory, and frequently, when stopping
to inquire about the roads, the first word in response will be the pointed
query, "prussian." by following the directions given by three different
peasants, i wander along the muddy by-roads among the vineyards for two
wet, unhappy hours ere i finally strike the main road to toul again.
after floundering along the wellnigh unimproved by-ways for two hours
one thoroughly appreciates how much he is indebted to the military
necessities of the french government for the splendid highways of france,
especially among these hills and valleys, where natural roadways would
be anything but good.  following down the moselle valley, i arrive at the
important city of nancy in the eventide, and am fortunate, i suppose,
in discovering a hotel where a certain, or, more properly speaking, an
uncertain, quantity and quality of english are spoken.  nancy is reputed
to be one of the loveliest towns in france.  but i merely remained in it
over night, and long enough next morning to exchange for some german
money, as i cross over the frontier to-day.

luneville is a town i pass through, some distance nearer the border, and
the military display here made is perfectly overshadowing.  even the
scarecrows in the fields are military figures, with wooden swords
threateningly waving about in their hands with every motion of the wind,
and the most frequent sound heard along the route is the sharp bang!
bang! of muskets, where companies of soldiers are target-practising in
the woods.  there seems to be a bellicose element in the very atmosphere;
for every dog in every village i ride through verily takes after me, and
i run clean over one bumptious cur, which, miscalculating the speed at
which i am coming, fails to get himself out of the way in time.  it is
the narrowest escape from a header i have had since starting from
liverpool; although both man and dog were more scared than hurt.  sixty-five
kilometres from nancy, and i take lunch at the frontier town of blamont.
the road becomes more hilly, and a short distance out of blamont, behold,
it is as though a chalk-line were made across the roadway, on the west
side of which it had been swept with scrupulous care, and on the east
side not swept at all; and when, upon passing the next roadman, i notice
that he bears not upon his cap the brass stencil-plate bearing the
inscription, " cantonnier," i know that i have passed over the frontier
into the territory of kaiser wilhelm.

my journey through fair prance has been most interesting, and perhaps
instructive, though i am afraid that the lessons i have taken in french
politeness are altogether too superficial to be lasting.  the "bonjour,
monsieur," and "bon voyage," of france, may not mean any more than the
"if i don't see you again, why, hello." of america, but it certainly
sounds more musical and pleasant.  it is at the table d'hote, however,
that i have felt myself to have invariably shone superior to the natives;
for, lo! the frenchman eats soup from the end of his spoon.  true, it is
more convenient to eat soup from the prow of a spoon than from the
larboard; nevertheless, it is when eating soup that i instinctively feel
my superiority.  the french peasants, almost without exception, conclude
that the bright-nickelled surface of the bicycle is silver, and presumably
consider its rider nothing less than a millionnaire in consequence; but
it is when i show them the length of time the rear wheel or a pedal will
spin round that they manifest their greatest surprise.  the crowning glory
of french landscape is the magnificent avenues of poplars that traverse
the country in every direction, winding with the roads, the railways,
and canals along the valleys, and marshalled like sentinels along the
brows of the distant hills; without them french scenery would lose half
its charm.






chapter vi.





germany, austria, and hungary.

notwithstanding alsace was french territory only fourteen years ago
(1871) there is a noticeable difference in the inhabitants, to me the
most acceptable being their great linguistic superiority over the people
on the french side of the border.  i linger in saarburg only about thirty
minutes, yet am addressed twice by natives in my own tongue; and at
pfalzburg, a smaller town, where i remain over night, i find the same
characteristic.  ere i penetrate thirty kilometres into german territory,
however, i have to record what was never encountered in france; an
insolent teamster, who, having his horses strung across a narrow road-
way in the suburbs of saarburg, refuses to turn his leaders' heads to
enable me to ride past, thus compelling me to dismount.  soldiers drilling,
soldiers at target practice, and soldiers in companies marching about
in every direction, greet my eyes upon approaching pfalzburg; and although
there appears to be less beating of drums and blare of trumpets than in
french garrison towns, one seldom turns a street corner without hearing
the measured tramp of a military company receding or approaching.  these
german troops appear to march briskly and in a business-like manner in
comparison with the french, who always seem to carry themselves with a
tired and dejected deportment; but the over-ample and rather slouchy-looking
pantaloons of the french are probably answerable, in part, for this
impression.  one cannot watch these sturdy-looking german soldiers without
a conviction that for the stern purposes of war they are inferior only
to the soldiers of our own country.  at the little gasthaus at pfalzburg
the people appear to understand and anticipate an englishman's gastronomic
peculiarities, for the first time since leaving england i am confronted
at the supper-table with excellent steak and tea.

it is raining next morning as i wheel over the rolling hills toward
saverne, a city nestling pleasantly in a little valley beyond those dark
wooded heights ahead that form the eastern boundary of the valley of the
rhine.  the road is good but hilly, and for several kilometres, before
reaching saverne, winds its way among the pine forests tortuously and
steeply down from the elevated divide.  the valley, dotted here and there
with pleasant villages, is spread out like a marvellously beautiful
picture, the ruins of several old castles on neighboring hill-tops adding
a charm, as well as a dash of romance.

the rain pours down in torrents as i wheel into saverne.  i pause long
enough to patronize a barber shop; also to procure an additional small
wrench.  taking my nickelled monkey-wrench into a likely-looking hardware
store, i ask the proprietor if he has anything similar.  he examines it
with lively interest, for, in comparison with the clumsy tools comprising
his stock-in-trade, the wrench is as a watch-spring to an old horse-shoe.
i purchase a rude tool that might have been fashioned on the anvil of a
village blacksmith.  from saverne my road leads over another divide and
down into the glorious valley of the rhine, for a short distance through
a narrow defile that reminds me somewhat of a canon in the sierra nevada
foot-hills; but a fine, broad road, spread with a coating of surface-mud
only by this morning's rain, prevents the comparison from assuming
definite shape for a cycler.  extensive and beautifully terraced vineyards
mark the eastern exit.  the road-beds of this country are hard enough for
anything; but a certain proportion of clay in their composition makes a
slippery coating in rainy weather.  i enter the village of marienheim and
observe the first stork's nest, built on top of a chimney, that i have
yet seen in europe, though i saw plenty of them afterward.  the parent
stork is perched solemnly over her youthful brood, which one would
naturally think would get smoke-dried.  a short distance from marlenheim
i descry in the hazy distance the famous spire of strasburg cathedral
looming conspicuously above everything else in all the broad valley; and
at 1.30 p.m.  i wheel through the massive arched gateway forming part of
the city's fortifications, and down the broad but roughly paved streets,
the most mud-be-spattered object in all strasburg.  the fortifications
surrounding the city are evidently intended strictly for business, and
not merely for outward display.  the railway station is one of the finest
in europe, and among other conspicuous improvements one notices steam
tram-cars.  while trundling through the city i am imperatively ordered
off the sidewalk by the policeman; and when stopping to inquire of a
respectable-looking strasburger for the appeuweir road, up steps an
individual with one eye and a cast off military cap three sizes too
small.  after querying, " appenweir.  englander?" he wheels "about face"
with military precision doubtless thus impelled by the magic influence
of his headgear - and beckons me to follow.  not knowing what better course
to pursue i obey, and after threading the mazes of a dozen streets,
composed of buildings ranging in architecture from the much gabled and
not unpicturesque structures of mediaeval times to the modern brown-stone
front, he pilots me outside the fortifications again, points up the
appenweir road, and after the never neglected formality of touching his
cap and extending his palm, returns city-ward.

crossing the rhine over a pontoon bridge, i ride along level and, happily,
rather less muddy roads, through pleasant suburban villages, near one
of which i meet a company of soldiers in undress uniform, strung out
carelessly along the road, as though returning from a tramp into the
country.  as i approach them, pedalling laboriously against a stiff head
wind, both myself and the bicycle fairly yellow with clay, both officers
and soldiers begin to laugh in a good-natured, bantering sort of manner,
and a round dozen of them sing out in chorus "ah! ah! der englander."
and as i reply, "yah! yah." in response, and smile as i wheel past
them, the laughing and banter go all along the line.  the sight of an
"englander" on one of his rambling expeditions of adventure furnishes
much amusement to the average german, who, while he cannot help admiring
the spirit of enterprise that impels him, fails to comprehend where the
enjoyment can possibly come in.  the average german would much rather
loll around, sipping wine or beer, and smoking cigarettes, than impel a
bicycle across a continent.  a few miles eastward of the rhine another
grim fortress frowns upon peaceful village and broad, green meads, and
off yonder to the right is yet another; sure enough, this franco-german
frontier is one vast military camp, with forts, and soldiers, and munitions
of war everywhere.  when i crossed the rhine i left lower alsace, and am
now penetrating the middle rhine region, where villages are picturesque
clusters of gabled cottages - a contrast to the shapeless and ancient-looking
stone structures of the french villages.  the difference also extends to
the inhabitants; the peasant women of france, in either real or affected
modesty, would usually pretend not to notice anything extraordinary as
i wheeled past, but upon looking back they would almost invariably be
seen standing and gazing after my receding figure with unmistakable
interest; but the women of these rhine villages burst out into merry
peals of laughter.

rolling over fair roads into the village of oberkirch, i conclude to
remain for the night, and the first thing undertaken is to disburden the
bicycle of its covering of clay.  the awkward-looking hostler comes around
several times and eyes the proceedings with glances of genuine disapproval,
doubtless thinking i am cleaning it myself instead of letting him swab
it with a besom with the single purpose in view of dodging the inevitable
tip.  the proprietor can speak a few words of english.  he puts his bald
head out of the window above, and asks: "pe you herr shtevens ?" "yah,
yah," i reply.

" do you go mit der veld around ?" "yah; i goes around mit the world."

"i shoust read about you mit der noospaper." " ah, indeed! what newspaper?"

"die frankfurter zeitung.  you go around mit der veld." the landlord looks
delighted to have for a guest the man who goes "mit der veld around,"
and spreads the news.  during the evening several people of importance
and position drop in to take a curious peep at me and my wheel.

a dampness about the knees, superinduced by wheeling in rubber leggings,
causes me to seek the privilege of the kitchen fire upon arrival.  after
listening to the incessant chatter of the cook for a few moments, i
suddenly dispense with all pantomime, and ask in purest english the
privilege of drying my clothing in peace and tranquillity by the kitchen
fire.  the poor woman hurries out, and soon returns with her highly
accomplished master, who, comprehending the situation, forthwith tenders
me the loan of his sunday pantaloons for the evening; which offer i
gladly accept, notwithstanding the wide disproportion in their size and
mine, the landlord being, horizontally, a very large person.  oberkirch
is a pretty village at the entrance to the narrow and charming valley
of the river bench, up which my route leads, into the fir-clad heights
of the black forest.  a few miles farther up the valley i wheel through
a small village that nestles amid surroundings the loveliest i have yet
seen.  dark, frowning firs intermingled with the lighter green of other
vegetation crown the surrounding spurs of the knibis mountains; vineyards,
small fields of waving rye, and green meadow cover the lower slopes with
variegated beauty, at the foot of which huddles the cluster of pretty
cottages amid scattered orchards of blossoming fruit-trees.  the cheery
lute of the herders on the mountains, the carol of birds, and the merry
music of dashing mountain-streams fill the fresh morning air with melody.
all through this country there are apple-trees, pear-trees, cherry-trees
in the fruit season one can scarce open his mouth out-doors without
having the goddess pomona pop in some delicious morsel.  the poplar
avenues of france have disappeared, but the road is frequently shaded
for miles with fruit-trees.  i never before saw a spot so lovely-certainly
not in combination with a wellnigh perfect road for wheeling.  on through
oppenau and petersthal my way leads - this latter a place of growing
importance as a summer resort, several commodious hotels with swimming-baths,
mineral waters, etc., being already prepared to receive the anticipated
influx of health and pleasure-seeking guests this coming summer - and then
up, up, up among the dark pines leading over the black forest mountains.
mile after mile of steep incline has now been trundled, following the
bench river to its source.  ere long the road i have lately traversed is
visible far below, winding and twisting up the mountain-slopes.  groups
of swarthy peasant women are carrying on their heads baskets of pine
cones to the villages below.  at a distance the sight of their bright red
dresses among the sombre green of the pines is suggestive of the fairies
with which legend has peopled the black forest.

the summit is reached at last, and two boundary posts apprise the traveller
that on this wooded ridge he passes from baden into wurtemberg.  the
descent for miles is agreeably smooth and gradual; the mountain air blows
cool and refreshing, with an odor of the pines; the scenery is black
forest scenery, and what more could be possibly desired than this happy
combination of circumstances.  reaching freudenstadt about noon, the
mountain-climbing, the bracing air, and the pine fragrance cause me to
give the good people at the gasthaus an impressive lesson in the effect
of cycling on the human appetite.  at every town and village i pass through
in wurtemberg the whole juvenile population collects around me in an
incredibly short time.  the natural impulse of the german small boy appears
to be to start running after me, shouting and laughing immoderately, and
when passing through some of the larger villages, it is no exaggeration
to say that i have had two hundred small germans, noisy and demonstrative,
clattering along behind in their heavy wooden shoes.

wurtemburg, by this route at least, is a decidedly hilly country, and
the roads are far inferior to those of both england and france.  there
will be, perhaps, three kilometres of trundling up through wooded heights
leading out of a small valley, then, after several kilometres over
undulating, stony upland roads, a long and not always smooth descent
into another small valley, this programme, several times repeated,
constituting the journey of the clay.  the small villages of the peasantry
are frequently on the uplands, but the larger towns are invariably in
the valleys, sheltered by wooded heights, perched among the crags of the
most inaccessible of which are frequently seen the ruins of an old castle.
scores of little boys of eight or ten are breaking stones by the road-side,
at which i somewhat marvel, since there is a compulsory school law in
germany; but perhaps to-day is a holiday; or maybe, after school hours,
it is customary for these unhappy youngsters to repair to the road-sides
and blister their hands with cracking flints.  "hungry as a buzz-saw" i
roll into the sleepy old town of rothenburg at six o'clock, and, repairing
to the principal hotel, order supper.  several flunkeys of different
degrees of usefulness come in and bow obsequiously from time to time,
as i sit around, expecting supper to appear every minute.  at seven o'clock
the waiter comes in, bows profoundly, and lays the table-cloth; at 7.15
he appears again, this time with a plate, knife, and fork, doing more
bowing and scraping as he lays them on the table.  another half-hour rolls
by, when, doubtless observing my growing impatience as he happens in at
intervals to close a shutter or re-regulate the gas, he produces a small
illustrated paper, and, bowing profoundly; lays it before me.  i feel
very much like making him swallow it, but resigning myself to what appears
to be inevitable fate, i wait and wait, and at precisely 8.15 he produces
a plate of soup; at 8.30 the kalbscotolet is brought on, and at 8.45 a
small plate of mixed biscuits.  during the meal i call for another piece
of bread, and behold there is a hurrying to and fro, and a resounding
of feet scurrying along the stone corridors of the rambling old building,
and ten minutes later i receive a small roll.  at the opposite end of the
long table upon which i am writing some half-dozen ancient and honorable
rothenburgers are having what they doubtless consider a "howling time."
confronting each is a huge tankard of foaming lager, and the one doubtless
enjoying himself the most and making the greatest success of exciting
the envy and admiration of those around him is a certain ponderous
individual who sits from hour to hour in a half comatose condition,
barely keeping a large porcelain pipe from going out, and at fifteen-minute
intervals taking a telling pull at the lager.  were it not for an occasional
blink of the eyelids and the periodical visitation of the tankard to his
lips, it would be difficult to tell whether he were awake or sleeping,
the act of smoking being barely perceptible to the naked eye.

in the morning i am quite naturally afraid to order anything to eat here
for fear of having to wait until mid-day, or thereabouts, before getting
it; so, after being the unappreciative recipient of several more bows,
more deferential and profound if anything than the bows of yesterday
eve, i wheel twelve kilometres to tubingen for breakfast.  it showers
occasionally during the forenoon, and after about thirty-five kilometres
of hilly country it begins to descend in torrents, compelling me to
follow the example of several peasants in seeking the shelter of a thick
pine copse.  we are soon driven out of it, however, and donning my gossamer
rubber suit, i push on to alberbergen, where i indulge in rye bread and
milk, and otherwise while away the hours until three o'clock, when, the
rain ceasing, i pull out through the mud for blaubeuren.  down the
beautiful valley of one of the danube's tributaries i ride on sunday
morning, pedalling to the music of blaubeuren's church-bells.  after
waiting until ten o'clock, partly to allow the roads to dry a little, i
conclude to wait no longer, and so pull out toward the important and
quite beautiful city of ulm.  the character of the country now changes,
and with it likewise the characteristics of the people, who verily seem
to have stamped upon their features the peculiarities of the region they
inhabit.  my road eastward of blaubeuren follows down a narrow, winding
valley, beside the rippling head-waters of the danube, and eighteen
kilometres of variable road brings me to the strongly fortified city of
ulm, the place i should have reached yesterday, except for the inclemency
of the weather, and where i cross from wurtemberg into bavaria.  on the
uninviting uplands of central wurtemberg one looks in vain among the
peasant women for a prepossessing countenance or a graceful figure, but
along the smiling valleys of bavaria, the women, though usually with
figures disproportionately broad, nevertheless carry themselves with a
certain gracefulness; and, while far from the american or english idea
of beautiful, are several degrees more so than their relatives of the
part of wilrtemberg i have traversed.  i stop but a few minutes at ulm,
to test a mug of its lager and inquire the details of the road to augsburg,
yet during that short time i find myself an object of no little curiosity
to the citizens, for the fame of my undertaking has pervaded ulm.

the roads of bavaria possess the one solitary merit of hardness, otherwise
they would be simply abominable, the bavarian idea of road-making evidently
being to spread unlimited quantities of loose stones over the surface.
for miles a wheelman is compelled to follow along narrow, wheel-worn
tracks, incessantly dodging loose stones, or otherwise to pedal his way
cautiously along the edges of the roadway.  i am now wheeling through the
greatest beer-drinking, sausage-consuming country in the world; hop-
gardens are a prominent feature of the landscape, and long links of
sausages are dangling in nearly every window.  the quantities of these
viands i see consumed to-day are something astonishing, though the
celebration of the whitsuntide holidays is probably augmentative of the
amount.

the strains of instrumental music come floating over the level bottom
of the lech valley as, toward eventide, i approach the beautiful environs
of augsburg, and ride past several beer-gardens, where merry crowds of
augsburgers are congregated, quaffing foaming lager, eating sausages,
and drinking inspiration from the music of military bands.  "where is the
headquarters of the augsburg velocipede club?" i inquire of a promising-looking
youth as, after covering one hundred and twenty kilometres since ten
o'clock, i wheel into the city.  the club's headquarters are at a prominent
cafe and beer-garden in the south-eastern suburbs, and repairing thither
i find an accommodating individual who can speak english, and who willingly
accepts the office of interpreter between me and the proprietor of the
garden.  seated amid hundreds of soldiers, augsburg civilians, and peasants
from the surrounding country, and with them extracting genuine enjoyment
from a tankard of foaming augsburg lager, i am informed that most of the
members of the club are celebrating the whitsuntide holidays by touring
about the surrounding country, but that i am very welcome to augsburg,
and i am conducted to the hotel mohrenkopf (moor's head hotel), and
invited to consider myself the guest of the club as long as i care to
remain in augsburg-the bavarians are nothing if not practical.

mr. josef kling, the president of the club, accompanies me as far out
as friedburg on monday morning; it is the last day of the holidays, and
the bavarians are apparently bent on making the most of it.  the suburban
beer-gardens are already filled with people, and for some distance out
of the city the roads are thronged with holiday-making augsburgers
repairing to various pleasure resorts in the neighboring country, and
the peasantry streaming cityward from the villages, their faces beaming
in anticipation of unlimited quantities of beer.  about every tenth person
among the outgoing augsburgers is carrying an accordion; some playing
merrily as they walk along, others preferring to carry theirs in blissful
meditation on the good time in store immediately ahead, while a thoughtful
majority have large umbrellas strapped to their backs.  music and song
are heard on every hand, and as we wheel along together in silence,
enforced by an ignorance of each other's language, whichever way one
looks, people in holiday attire and holiday faces are moving hither and
thither.

some of the peasants are fearfully and wonderfully attired: the men wear
high top-boots, polished from the sole to the uppermost hair's breadth
of leather; black, broad-brimmed felt hats, frequently with a peacock's
feather a yard long stuck through the band, the stem protruding forward,
and the end of the feather behind; and their coats and waistcoats are
adorned with long rows of large, ancestral buttons.  i am now in the
swabian district, and these buttons that form so conspicuous a part of
the holiday attire are made of silver coins, and not infrequently have
been handed down from generation to generation for several centuries,
they being, in fact, family heirlooms.  the costumes of the swabish peasant
women are picturesque in the extreme: their finest dresses and that
wondrous head-gear of brass, silver, or gold - the schwabische
bauernfrauenhaube (swabish farmer-woman hat) - being, like the buttons
of the men, family heirlooms.  some of these wonderful ancestral dresses,
i am told, contain no less than one hundred and fifty yards of heavy
material, gathered and closely pleated in innumerable perpendicular folds,
frequently over a foot thick, making the form therein incased appear
ridiculously broad and squatty.  the waistbands of the dresses are up in the
region of the shoulder-blades; the upper portion of the sleeves are likewise
padded out to fearful proportions.

the day is most lovely, the fields are deserted, and the roads and
villages are alive with holiday-making peasants.  in every village a tall
pole is erected, and decorated from top to bottom with small flags and
evergreen wreaths.  the little stone churches and the adjoining cemeteries
are filled with worshippers chanting in solemn chorus; not so preoccupied
with their devotional exercises and spiritual meditations, however, as
to prevent their calling one another's attention to me as i wheel past,
craning their necks to obtain a better view, and, in one instance, an
o'er-inquisitive worshipper even beckons for me to stop - this person both
chanting and beckoning vigorously at the same time.

now my road leads through forests of dark firs; and here i overtake a
procession of some fifty peasants, the men and women alternately chanting
in weird harmony as they trudge along the road.  the men are bareheaded,
carrying their hats in hand.  many of the women are barefooted, and the
pedal extremities of others are incased in stockings of marvellous
pattern; not any are wearing shoes.  all the colors of the rainbow are
represented in their respective costumes, and each carries a large
umbrella strapped at his back; they are trudging along at quite a brisk
pace, and altogether there is something weird and fascinating about the
whole scene: the chanting and the surroundings.  the variegated costumes
of the women are the only bright objects amid the gloominess of the dark
green pines.  as i finally pass ahead, the unmistakable expressions of
interest on the faces of the men, and the even rows of ivories displayed
by the women, betray a diverted attention.

near noon i arrive at the antiquated town of dachau, and upon repairing
to the gasthaus, an individual in a last week's paper collar, and with
general appearance in keeping, comes forward and addresses me in quite
excellent english, and during the dinner hour answers several questions
concerning the country and the natives so intelligently that, upon
departing, i ungrudgingly offer him the small tip customary on such
occasions in germany. "no, whitsuntide in bavaria. i thank you, very
muchly," he replies, smiling, and shaking his head.  "i am not an employe
of the hotel, as you doubtless think; i am a student of modern languages
at the munich university, visiting dauhau for the day." several soldiers
playing billiards in the room grin broadly in recognition of the ludicrousness
situation; and i must confess that for the moment i feel like asking one of
them to draw his sword and charitably prod me out of the room.  the unhappy
memory of having, in my ignorance, tendered a small tip to a student of the
munich university will cling around me forever.  nevertheless, i feel that after
all there are extenuating circumstances - he ought to change his paper collar
occasionally.

an hour after noon i am industriously dodging loose flints on the level
road leading across the isar river valley toward munich; the tyrolese
alps loom up, shadowy and indistinct, in the distance to the southward,
their snowy peaks recalling memories of the rockies through which i was
wheeling exactly a year ago.  while wending my way along the streets
toward the central portion of the bavarian capital the familiar sign,
"american cigar store," looking like a ray of light penetrating through
the gloom and mystery of the multitudinous unreadable signs that surround
it, greets my vision, and i immediately wend my footsteps thitherward.
i discover in the proprietor, mr. walsch, a native of munich, who, after
residing in america for several years, has returned to dream away declining
years amid the smoke of good cigars and the quaffing of the delicious
amber beer that the brewers of munich alone know how to brew.  then who
should happen in but mr. charles buscher, a thorough-going american;
from chicago, who is studying art here at the royal academy of fine arts,
and who straightway volunteers to show me munich.

nine o'clock next morning finds me under the pilotage of mr. buscher,
wandering through the splendid art galleries.  we next visit the royal
academy of fine arts, a magnificent building, being erected at a cost
of 7,000,000 marks.

we repair at eleven o'clock to the royal residence, making a note by the
way of a trifling mark of king ludwig's well-known eccentricity.  opposite
the palace is an old church, with two of its four clocks facing the
king's apartments.  the hands of these clocks are, according to my
informant, made of gold.  some time since the king announced that the
sight of these golden hands hurt his eyesight, and ordered them painted
black.  it was done, and they are black to-day.  among the most interesting
objects in the palace are the room and bed in which napoleon i. slept
in 1809, which has since been occupied by no other person; the "rich
bed," a gorgeous affair of pink and scarlet satin-work, on which forty
women wove, with gold thread, daily, for ten years, until 1,600,000 marks
were expended.

at one of the entrances to the royal residence, and secured with iron
bars, is a large bowlder weighing three hundred and sixty-three pounds;
in the wall above it are driven three spikes, the highest spike being
twelve feet from the ground; and bavarian historians have recorded that
earl christoph, a famous giant, tossed this bowlder up to the mark
indicated by the highest spike, with his foot.

after this i am kindly warned by both messrs. buscher and walsch not to
think of leaving the city without visiting the konigliche hofbrauhaus
(royal court brewery) the most famous place of its kind in all europe.
for centuries munich has been famous for the excellent quality of its
beer, and somewhere about four centuries ago the king founded this famous
brewery for the charitable purpose of enabling his poorer subjects to
quench their thirst with the best quality of beer, at prices within their
means, and from generation to generation it has remained a favorite
resort in munich for lovers of good beer.  in spite of its remaining, as
of yore, a place of rude benches beneath equally rude, open sheds, with
cobwebs festooning the rafters and a general air of dilapidation about
it; in spite of the innovation of dozens of modern beer-gardens with
waving palms, electric lights, military music, and all modern improvements,
the konigliche hofbrauhaus is daily and nightly thronged with thirsty
visitors, who for the trifling sum of twenty-two pfennigs (about five
cents) obtain a quart tankard of the most celebrated brew in all bavaria.

"munich is the greatest art-centre of the world, the true hub of the
artistic universe," mr. buscher enthusiastically assures me as we wander
together through the sleepy old streets, and he points out a bright bit
of old frescoing, which is already partly obliterated by the elements,
and compares it with the work of recent years; calls my attention to a
piece of statuary, and anon pilots me down into a restaurant and beer
hall in some ancient, underground vaults and bids me examine the
architecture and the frescoing.  the very custom-house of munich is a
glorious old church, that would be carefully preserved as a relic of no
small interest and importance in cities less abundantly blessed with
antiquities, but which is here piled with the cases and boxes and bags
of commerce.  one other conspicuous feature of munich life must not be
over-looked ere i leave it, viz., the hackmen.  unlike their transatlantic
brethren, they appear supremely indifferent about whether they pick up
any fares or not.  whenever one comes to a hack-stand it is a pretty sure
thing to bet that nine drivers out of every ten are taking a quiet snooze,
reclining on their elevated boxes, entirely oblivious of their surroundings,
and a timid stranger would almost hesitate about disturbing their slumbers.
but the munich cabby has long since got hardened to the disagreeable
process of being wakened up.  nor does this lethargy pervade the ranks
of hackdom only: at least two-thirds of the teamsters one meets on the
roads, hereabouts, are stretched out on their respective loads, contentedly
sleeping while the horses or oxen crawl leisurely along toward their
goal.

munich is visited heavily with rain during the night, and for several
kilometres, next morning, the road is a horrible waste of loose flints
and mud-filled ruts, along which it is all but impossible to ride; but
after leaving the level bottom of the isar river the road improves
sufficiently to enable me to take an occasional, admiring glance at the
bavarian and tyrolese alps, towering cloudward on the southern horizon,
their shadowy outlines scarcely distinguishable in the hazy distance
from the fleecy clouds their peaks aspire to invade.  while absentmindedly
taking a more lingering look than is consistent with safety when picking
one's way along the narrow edge of the roadway between the stone-strewn
centre and the ditch, i run into the latter, and am rewarded with my
first cis-atlantic header, but fortunately both myself and the bicycle
come up uninjured.  unlike the swabish peasantry, the natives east of
munich appear as prosy and unpicturesque in dress as a kansas homesteader.

ere long there is noticeable a decided change in the character of the
villages, they being no longer clusters of gabled cottages, but usually
consist of some three or four huge, rambling bulldings, at one of which
i call for a drink and observe that brewing and baking are going on as
though they were expecting a whole regiment to be quartered on them.
among other things i mentally note this morning is that the men actually
seem to be bearing the drudgery of the farm equally with the women; but
the favorable impression becomes greatly imperilled upon meeting a woman
harnessed to a small cart, heavily laboring along, while her husband -
kind man - is walking along-side, holding on to a rope, upon which he
considerately pulls to assist her along and lighten her task.  nearing
hoag, and thence eastward, the road becomes greatly improved, and along
the inn river valley, from muhldorf to alt oetting, where i remain for
the night, the late rain-storm has not reached, and the wheeling is
superior to any i have yet had in germany.  muhldorf is a curious and
interesting old town.  the sidewalks of muhldorf are beneath long arcades
from one end of the principal street to the other; not modern structures
either, but massive archways that are doubtless centuries old, and that
support the front rooms of the buildings that tower a couple of stories
above them.

as toward dusk i ride into the market square of alt oetting, it is
noticeable that nearly all the stalls and shops remaining open display
nothing but rosaries, crucifixes, and other paraphernalia of the prevailing
religion.  through eastern bavaria the people seern pre-eminently devotional;
church-spires dot the landscape at every point of the compass.  at my
hotel in alt oetting, crucifixes, holy water, and burning tapers are
situated on the different stairway landings.  i am sitting in my room,
penning these lines to the music of several hundred voices chanting in
the old stone church near by, and can look out of the window and see a
number of peasant women taking turns in dragging themselves on their
knees round and round a small religious edifice in the centre of the
market square, carrying on their shoulders huge, heavy wooden crosses,
the ends of which are trailing on the ground.

all down the inn river valley, there is many a picturesque bit of
intermingled pine-copse and grassy slopes; but admiring scenery is
anything but a riskless undertaking along here, as i quickly discover.
on the inn river i find a primitive ferry-boat operated by a, fac-simile
of the ancient mariner, who takes me and my wheel across for the
consideration of five pfennigs-a trifle over one cent -and when i refuse
the tiny change out of a ten-pfennig piece the old fellow touches his
cap as deferentially, and favors me with a look of gratitude as profound,
as though i were bestowing a pension upon him for life.  my arrival at a
broad, well-travelled high-way at once convinces me that i have again
been unwittingly wandering among the comparatively untravelled by-ways
as the result of following the kindly meant advice of people whose
knowledge of bicycling requirements is of the slimmest nature.  the inn
river a warm, rich vale; haymaking is already in full progress, and
delightful perfume is wafted on the fresh morning air from aclows where
scores of barefooted maud mullers are raking hay, and mowing it too,
swinging scythes side by side with the men. some of the out-door crucifixes
and shrines (small, substantial buildings containing pictures, images,
and all sorts of religious -emblems) along this valley are really quite
elaborate affairs.  all through roman catholic germany these emblems of
religion are very elaborate, or the reverse, according to the locality,
the chosen spot in rich and fertile valleys generally being favored with
better and more artistic affairs, and more of them, than the comparatively
unproductive uplands.  this is evidently because the inhabitants of the
latter regions are either less wealthy, and consequently cannot afford
it, or otherwise realize that they have really much less to be thankful
for than their comparatively fortunate neighbors in the more productive
valleys.

at the town of simbach i cross the inn river again on a substantial
wooden bridge, and on the opposite side pass under an old stone archway
bearing the austrian coat-of-arms.  here i am conducted into the custom-house
by an officer wearing the sombre uniform of franz josef, and required,
for the first time in europe, to produce my passport.  after a critical
and unnecessarily long examination of this document i am graciously
permitted to depart.  in an adjacent money-changer's office i exchange
what german money i have remaining for the paper currency of austria,
and once more pursue my way toward the orient, finding the roads rather
better than the average german ones, the austrians, hereabouts at least,
having had the goodness to omit the loose flints so characteristic of
bavaria.  once out of the valley of the inn river, however, i find the
uplands intervening between it and the valley of the danube aggravatingly
hilly.

while eating my first luncheon in austria, at the village of altheim,
the village pedagogue informs me in good english that i am the first
briton he has ever had the pleasure of conversing with.  he learned the
language entirely from books, without a tutor, he says, learning it for
pleasure solely, never expecting to utilize the accomplishment in any
practical way.  one hill after another characterizes my route to-day; the
weather, which has hitherto remained reasonably mild, is turning hot and
sultry, and, arriving at hoag about five o'clock, i feel that i have
done sufficient hillclimbing for one day.  i have been wheeling through
austrian territory since 10.30 this morning, and, with observant eyes
the whole distance, i have yet to see the first native, male or female,
possessing in the least degree either a graceful figure or a prepossessing
face.  there has been a great horse-fair at hoag to-day; the business of
the day is concluded, and the principal occupation of the men, apart
from drinking beer and smoking, appears to be frightening the women out
of their wits by leading prancing horses as near them as possible.

my road, on leaving hoag, is hilly, and the snowy heights of the nordliche
kalkalpen (north chalk mountains), a range of the austrian alps, loom
up ahead at an uncertain distance.  to-day is what americans call a
"scorcher," and climbing hills among pine-woods, that shut out every
passing breeze, is anything but exhilarating exercise with the thermometer
hovering in the vicinity of one hundred degrees.  the peasants are abroad
in their fields as usual, but a goodly proportion are reclining beneath
the trees.  reclining is, i think, a favorite pastime with the austrian.
the teamster, who happens to be wide awake and sees me approaching, knows
instinctively that his team is going to scare at the bicycle, yet he
makes no precautionary movements whatever, neither does he arouse himself
from his lolling position until the horses or oxen begin to swerve around.
as a usual thing the teamster is filling his pipe, which has a large,
ungainly-looking, porcelain bowl, a long, straight wooden stem, and a
crooked mouth-piece.  almost every austrian peasant from sixteen years
old upward carries one of these uncomely pipes.

the men here seem to be dull, uninteresting mortals, dressed in tight-
fitting, and yet, somehow, ill-fitting, pantaloons, usually about three
sizes too short, a small apron of blue ducking-an unbecoming garment
that can only be described as a cross between a short jacket and a
waistcoat - and a narrow-rimmed, prosy-looking billycock hat.  the peasant
women are the poetry of austria, as of any other european country, and
in their short red dresses and broad-brimmed, gypsy hats, they look
picturesque and interesting in spite of homely faces and ungraceful
figures.  riding into lambach this morning, i am about wheeling past a
horse and drag that, careless and austrian-like, has been left untied
and unwatched in the middle of the street, when the horse suddenly scares,
swerves around just in front of me, and dashes, helter-skelter, down the
street.  the horse circles around the market square and finally stops of
his own accord without doing any damage.  runaways, other misfortunes,
it seems, never come singly, and ere i have left lambach an hour i am
the innocent cause of yet another one; this time it is a large, powerful
work-dog, who becomes excited upon meeting me along the road, and upsets
things in the most lively manner.  small carts pulled by dogs are common
vehicles here and this one is met coming up an incline, the man considerately
giving the animal a lift.  a life of drudgery breaks the spirit of these
work-dogs and makes them cowardly and cringing.  at my approach this one
howls, and swerves suddenly around with a rush that upsets both man and
cart, topsy-turvy, into the ditch, and the last glimpse of the rumpus
obtained, as i sweep past and down the hill beyond, is the man pawing
the air with his naked feet and the dog struggling to free himself from
the entangling harness.

up among the hills, at the village of strenburg, night arrives at a very
opportune moment to-day, for strenburg proves a nice, sociable sort of
village, where the doctor can speak good english and plays the role of
interpreter for me at the gasthaus.  the school-ma'am, a vivacious italian
lady, in addition to french and german, can also speak a few words of
english, though she persistently refers to herself as the " school
-master." she boards at the same gasthaus, and all the evening long i
am favored by the liveliest prattle and most charming gesticulations
imaginable, while the room is half filled with her class of young lady
aspirants to linguistic accomplishments, listening to our amusing, if
not instructive, efforts to carry on a conversation. ' it is altogether
a most enjoyable evening, and on parting i am requested to write when i
get around the world and tell the strenburgers all that i have seen and
experienced.  on top of the gasthaus is a rude observatory, and before
starting i take a view of the country.  the outlook is magnificent; the
austrian alps are towering skyward to the southeast, rearing snow-crowned
heads out from among a billowy sea of pine-covered hills, and to the
northward is the lovely valley of the danube, the river glistening softly
through the morning haze.

on yonder height, overlooking the danube on the one hand and the town
of molk on the other, is the largest and most imposing edifice i have
yet seen in austria; it is a convent of the benedictine monks; and though
molk is a solid, substantially built town, of perhaps a thousand
inhabitants, i should think there is more material in the immense convent
building than in the whole town besides, and one naturally wonders
whatever use the monks can possibly have for a building of such enormous
dimensions.  entering a barber's shop here for a shave, i find the barber of
molk following the example of so many of his countrymen by snoozing the
mid-day hours happily and unconsciously away.  one could easily pocket
and walk off with his stock-in-trade, for small is the danger of his awakening.
waking him up, he shuffles mechanically over to hia razor and lathering
apparatus, this latter being a soup-plate with a semicircular piece
chipped out to fit, after a fashion, the contour of the customers'
throats.  pressing this jagged edge of queen's-ware against your windpipe,
the artist alternately rubs the water and a cake of soap therein contained
about your face with his hands, the water meanwhile passing freely between
the ill-fitting' soup-plate and your throat, and running down your breast;
but don't complain; be reasonable: no reasonable-minded person could
expect one soup-plate, however carefully chipped out, to fit the throats
of the entire male population of molk, besides such travellers as happen
along.

spending the night at neu lengbach, i climb hills and wabble along, over
rough, lumpy roads, toward vienna, reaching the austrian capital sunday
morning, and putting up at the englischer eof about noon.  at vienna i
determine to make a halt of two days, and on tuesday pay a visit to the
headquarters of the vienna wanderers' bicycle club, away out on a suburban
street called schwimmschulenstrasse; and the club promises that if i
will delay my departure another day they will get up a small party of
wheelmen to escort me seventy kilometres, to presburg.  the bicycle clubs
of vienna have, at the wanderers' headquarters, constructed an excellent
race-track, three and one-third laps to the english mile, at an expense
of 2,000 gulden, and this evening several of austria's fliers are training
upon it for the approaching races.  english and american wheelmen little
understand the difficulties these vienna cyclers have to contend with:
all the city inside the ringstrasse, and no less than fifty streets
outside, are forbidden to the mounted cyclers, and they are required to
ticket themselves with big, glaring letters, as also their lamps at
night, so that, in case of violating any of these regulations, they can
by their number be readily recognized by the police.  self-preservation
compels the clubs to exercise every precaution against violating the
police regulations, in order not to excite popular prejudice overwhelmingly
against bicycles, and ere a new rider is permitted to venture outside
their own grounds he is hauled up before a regularly organized committee,
consisting of officers from each club in vienna, and required to go
through a regular examination in mounting, dismounting, and otherwise
proving to their entire satisfaction his proficiency in managing and
manoeuvring his wheel; besides which every cycler is provided with a
pamphlet containing a list of the streets he may and may not frequent.
in spite of all these harassing regulations, the austrian capital has
already two hundred riders.  the viennese impress themselves upon me as
being possessed of more than ordinary individuality.  yonder comes a man,
walking languidly along, and carrying his hat in his hand, because it
is warm, and just behind him comes a fellow-citizen muffled up in an
overcoat because - because of viennese individuality.  the people seem to
walk the streets with a swaying, happy-go-anyhow sort of gait, colliding
with one another and jostling together on the sidewalk in the happiest
manner imaginable.

at five o'clock on thursday morning i am dressing, when i am notified
that two cyclers are awaiting me below.  church-bells are clanging joyously
all over vienna as we meander toward suburbs, and people are already
streaming in the direction of the st. stephen's church, near the centre
of the city, for to-day is frohnleichnam (corpus christi), and the emperor
and many of the great ecclesiastical, civil, and military personages of
the empire will pass in procession with all pomp and circumstance; and
the average viennese is not the person to miss so important an occasion.
three other wheelmen are awaiting us in the suburbs, and together we
ride through the waving barley-fields of the danube bottom to schwechat,
for the light breakfast customary in austria, and thence onward to
petronelle, thirty kilometres distant, where we halt a few minutes for
a corpus christi procession, and drink a glass of white hungarian wine.
near petronelle are the remains of an old roman wall, extending from the
danube to a lake called the neusiedler see.  my companions say it was
built 2,000 years ago, when the sway of the romans extended over such
parts of europe as were worth the trouble and expense of swaying.  the
roads are found rather rough and inferior, on account of loose stones
and uneven surface, as we push forward toward presburg, passing through
a dozen villages whose streets are carpeted with fresh-cut grass, and
converted into temporary avenues, with branches stuck in the ground, in
honor of the day they are celebrating.  at hamburg we pass beneath an
archway nine hundred years old, and wheel on through the grass-carpeted
streets between rows of hungarian soldiers drawn up in line, with green
oak-sprigs in their hats; the villagers are swarming from the church,
whose bells are filling the air with their clangor, and on the summit
of an over-shadowing cliff are the massive ruins of an ancient castle.
near about noon we roll into presburg, warm and dusty, and after dinner
take a stroll through the jewish quarter of the town up to the height
upon which presburg castle is situated, and from which a most extensive
and beautiful view of the danube, its wooded bluffs and broad, rich
bottom-lands, is obtainable.  at dinner the waiter hands me a card, which
reads: "pardon me, but i believe you are an englishman, in which case
i beg the privilege of drinking a glass of wine with you." the sender
is an english gentleman residing at budapest, hungary, who, after the
requested glass of wine, tells me that he guessed who i was when he first
saw me enter the garden with the five austrian wheelmen.

my austrian escort rides out with me to a certain cross-road, to make
sure of heading me direct toward budapest, and as we part they bid me
good speed, with a hearty "eljen." - the hungarian "hip, hip, hurrah."
after leaving presburg and crossing over into hungary the road-bed is
of a loose gravel that, during the dry weather this country is now
experiencing, is churned up and loosened by every passing vehicle, until
one might as well think of riding over a ploughed field.  but there is a
fair proportion of ridable side-paths, so that i make reasonably good
time.  altenburg, my objective point for the night, is the centre of a
sixty-thousand-acre estate belonging to the archduke albrecht, uncle of
the present emperor of austro-hungary, and one of the wealthiest land-owners
in the empire.  ere i have been at the gasthaus an hour i am honored by
a visit from professor thallmeyer, of the altenburg royal agricultural
school, who invites me over to his house to spend an hour in conversation,
and in the discussion of a bottle of hungary's best vintage, for the
learned professor can talk very good english, and his wife is of english
birth and parentage.  although frau thallmeyer left england at the tender
age of two years, she calls herself an englishwoman, speaks of england
as "home," and welcomes to her house as a countryman any wandering
briton happening along.  i am no longer in a land of small peasant
proprietors, and there is a noticeably large proportion of the land
devoted to grazing purposes, that in france or germany would be found
divided into small farms, and every foot cultivated.  villages are farther
apart, and are invariably adjacent to large commons, on which roam flocks
of noisy geese, herds of ponies, and cattle with horns that would make
a texan blush - the long horned roadsters of hungary.  the costumes of the
hungarian peasants are both picturesque and novel, the women and girls
wearing top-boots and short dresses on holiday occasions and sundays,
and at other times short dresses without any boots at all; the men wear
loose-flowing pantaloons of white, coarse linen that reach just below
the knees, and which a casual observer would unhesitatingly pronounce a
short skirt, the material being so ample.  hungary is still practically
a land of serfs and nobles, and nearly every peasant encountered along
the road touches his cap respectfully, in instinctive acknowledgment,
as it were, of his inferiority.  long rows of women are seen hoeing in
the fields with watchful overseers standing over them - a scene not
unsuggestive of plantation life in the southern states in the days of
slavery.  if these gangs of women are not more than about two hundred
yards from the road their inquisitiveness overcomes every other
consideration, and dropping everything, the whole crowd comes helter-skelter
across the field to obtain a closer view of the strange vehicle; for it
is only in the neighborhood of one or two of the principal cities of
hungary that one ever sees a bicycle.

gangs of gypsies are now frequently met with; they are dark-skinned,
interesting people, and altogether different-looking from those occasionally
encountered in england and america, where, although swarthy and dark-skinned,
they bear no comparison in that respect to these, whose skin is wellnigh
black, and whose gleaming white teeth and brilliant, coal-black eyes
stamp them plainly as alien to the race around them.  ragged, unwashed,
happy gangs of vagabonds these stragglers appear, and regular droves of
partially or wholly naked youngsters come racing after me, calling out
"kreuzer! kreuzer! kreuzer!" and holding out hand or tattered hat in
a supplicating manner as they run along-side.  unlike the peasantry, none
of these gypsies touch their hats; indeed, yon swarthy-faced vagabond,
arrayed mainly in gewgaws, and eying me curiously with his piercing black
eyes, may be priding himself on having royal blood in his veins; and,
unregenerate chicken-lifter though he doubtless be, would scarce condescend
to touch his tattered tile even to the emperor of austria.  the black
eyes scintillate as they take notice of what they consider the great
wealth of sterling silver about the machine i bestride.  eastward from
altenburg the main portion of the road continues for the most part
unridably loose and heavy.

for some kilometres out of raab the road presents a far better surface,
and i ride quite a lively race with a small danube passenger steamer
that is starting down-stream.  the steamboat toots and forges ahead, and
in answer to the waving of hats and exclamations of encouragement from
the passengers, i likewise forge ahead, and although the boat is going
down-stream with the strong current of the danube, as long as the road
continues fairly good i manage to keep in advance; but soon the loose
surface reappears, and when i arrive at gonys, for lunch, i find the
steamer already tied up, and the passengers and officers greet my
appearance with shouts of recognition.  my route along the danube valley
leads through broad, level wheat-fields that recall memories of the
sacramento valley, california.  geese appear as the most plentiful objects
around the villages: there are geese and goslings everywhere; and this
evening, in a small village, i wheel quite over one, to the dismay of
the maiden driving them homeward, and the unconcealed delight of several
small hungarians.

at the village of nezmely i am to-night treated to a foretaste of what
is probably in store for me at a goodly number of places ahead by being
consigned to a bunch of hay and a couple of sacks in the stable as the
best sleeping accommodations the village gasthaus affords.  true, i am
assigned the place of honor in the manger, which, though uncomfortably
narrow and confining, is perhaps better accommodation, after all, than
the peregrinating tinker and three other likely-looking characters are
enjoying on the bare floor.  some of these companions, upon retiring,
pray aloud at unseemly length, and one of them, at least, keeps it up
in his sleep at frequent intervals through the night; horses and work-cattle
are rattling chains and munching hay, and an uneasy goat, with a bell
around his neck, fills the stable with an incessant tinkle till dawn.
black bread and a cheap but very good quality of white wine seem about
the only refreshment obtainable at these little villages.  one asks in
vain for milch-brod, butter, kdsc, or in fact anything acceptable to the
english palate; the answer to all questions concerning these things is
"nicht, nicht, nicht." - "what have you, then?" i sometimes ask, the
answer to which is almost invariably "brod und wein." stone-yards thronged
with busy workmen, chipping stone for shipment to cities along the danube,
are a feature of these river-side villages.  the farther one travels the
more frequently gypsies are encountered on the road.  in almost every
band is a maiden, who, by reason of real or imaginary beauty, occupies
the position of pet of the camp, wears a profusion of beads and trinkets,
decorates herself with wild flowers, and is permitted to do no manner
of drudgery.  some of these gypsy maidens are really quite beautiful in
spite of their very dark complexions.  their eyes glisten with inborn
avarice as i sweep past on my "silver" bicycle, and in their astonishment
at my strange appearance and my evidently enormous wealth they almost
forget their plaintive wail of "kreuzer! kreuzer!" a cry which readily
bespeaks their origin, and is easily recognized as an echo from the land
where the cry of "backsheesh" is seldom out of the traveller's hearing.

the roads east of nezmely are variable, flint-strewn ways predominating;
otherwise the way would be very agreeable, since the gradients are gentle,
and the dust not over two inches deep, as against three in most of austro-
hungary thus far traversed.  the weather is broiling hot; but i worry
along perseveringly, through rough and smooth, toward the land of the
rising sun.  nearing budapest the roads become somewhat smoother, but at
the same time hillier, the country changing to vine-clad slopes; and all
along the undulating ways i meet wagons laden with huge wine-casks.
reaching budapest in the afternoon, i seek out mr. kosztovitz, of the
budapest bicycle club, and consul of the cyclists' touring club, who
proves a most agreeable gentleman, and who, besides being an enthusiastic
cycler, talks english perfectly.  there is more of the sporting spirit
in budapest, perhaps, than in any other city of its size on the continent,
and no sooner is my arrival known than i am taken in hand and practically
compelled to remain over at least one day.  svetozar igali, a noted cycle
tourist of the village of duna szekeso, now visiting the international
exhibition at budapest, volunteers to accompany me to belgrade, and
perhaps to constantinople.  i am rather surprised at finding so much
cycling enthusiasm in the hungarian capital.  mr. kosztovitz, who lived
some time in england, and was president of a bicycle club there, had the
honor of bringing the first wheel into the austro-hungarian empire, in
the autumn of 1879, and now budapest alone has three clubs, aggregating
nearly a hundred riders, and a still greater number of non-riding members.
cyclers have far more liberty accorded them in budapest than in vienna,
being permitted to roam the city almost as untrammelled as in london,
this happy condition of affairs being partly the result of mr. kosztovitz's
diplomacy in presenting a ready drawn-up set of rules and regulations
for the government of wheelmen to the police authorities when the first
bicycle was introduced, and partly to the police magistrate, being himself
an enthusiastic all-'round sportsman, inclined to patronize anything in
the way of athletics.  they are even experimenting in the hungarian army
with the view of organizing a bicycle despatch service; and i am told
that they already have a bicycle despatch in successful operation in the
bavarian army.  in the evening i am the club's guest at a supper under
the shade-trees in the exhibition grounds.  mr. kosztovitz and another
gentleman who can speak english act as interpreters, and here, amid the
merry clinking of champagne-glasses, the glare of electric lights, with
the ravishing music of an hungarian gypsy band on our right, and a band
of swarthy servians playing their sweet native melodies on our left, we,
among other toasts, drink to the success of my tour.  there is a cosmopolitan
and exceedingly interesting crowd of visitors at the international
exhibition: natives from bulgaria, servia, roumania, and turkey, in their
national costumes; and mingled among them are hungarian peasants from
various provinces, some of them in a remarkably picturesque dress, that
i afterward learn is croatian.  a noticeable feature of budapest, besides
a predilection for sport among the citizens, is a larger proportion of
handsome ladies than one sees in most european cities, and there is,
moreover, a certain atmosphere about them that makes them rather agreeable
company.  if one is travelling around the world with a bicycle, it is not
at all inconsistent with budapest propriety for the wife of the wheelman
sitting opposite you to remark that she wishes she were a rose, that you
might wear her for a button-hole bouquet on your journey, and to ask
whether or not, in that case, you would throw the rose away when it
faded.  compliments, pleasant, yet withal as meaningless as the coquettish
glances and fan-play that accompany them, are given with a freedom and
liberality that put the sterner native of more western countries at his
wits' end to return them.  but the most delightful thing in all hungary
is its gypsy music.  as it is played here beneath its own sunny skies,
methinks there is nothing in the wide world to compare with it.  the music
does not suit the taste of some people, however; it is too wild and
thrilling.  budapest is a place of many languages, one of the waiters in
the exhibition cafe claiming the ability to speak and understand no less
than fourteen different languages and dialects.

nine wheelmen accompany me some distance out of budapest on monday
morning, and mr. philipovitz and two other members continue with igali
and me to duna pentele, some seventy-five miles distant; this is our
first sleeping-place, the captain making his guest until our separation
and departure in different directions next morning.  during the fierce
heat of mid-day we halt for about three hours at adony, and spend a
pleasant after-dinner lour examining the trappings and trophies of a
noted sporting gentleman, and witnessing a lively and interesting set-to
with fencing foils.  there is everything in fire-arms in his cabinet,
from an english double-barrelled shot-gun to a tiny air-pistol for
shooting flies on the walls of his sitting-room; he has swords, oars,
gymnastic paraphernalia - in fact, everything but boxing gloves.  arriving
at duna pentele early in the evening, before supper we swim for an hour
in the waters of the danube.  at 9.30 p.m. two of our little company board
the up-stream-bound steamer for the return home, and at ten o'clock we
are proposing to retire for the night, when lo, in come a half-dozen
gentlemen, among them mr. ujvarii, whose private wine-cellar is celebrated
all the country round, and who now proposes that we postpone going to
bed long enough to pay a short visit to his cellar and sample the
"finest wine in hungary." this is an invitation not to be resisted by
ordinary mortals, and accordingly we accept, following the gentleman and
his friends through the dark streets of the village.  along the dark,
cool vault penetrating the hill-side mr. ujvarii leads the way between
long rows of wine-casks, heber* held in arm like a sword at dress parade.
the heber is first inserted into a cask of red wine, with a perfume and
flavor as agreeable as the rose it resembles in color, and carried, full,
to the reception end of the vault by the corpulent host with the stately
air of a monarch bearing his sceptre.  after two rounds of the red wine,
two hebers of champagne are brought - champagne that plays a fountain of
diamond spray three inches above the glass.  the following toast is
proposed by the host: "the prosperity and welfare of england, america,
and hungary, three countries that are one in their love and appreciation
of sport and adventure." the hungarians have all the anglo-american love
of sport and adventure.* a glass combination of tube and flask, holding
about three pints, with an orifice at each end and the bulb or flask
near the upper orifice; the wine is sucked up into the flask with the
breath, and when withdrawn from the cask the index finger is held over
the lower orifice, from which the glasses are filled by manipulations
of the finger.

>from budapest to paks, about one hundred and twenty kilometres, the roads
are superior to anything i expected to find east of germany; but the
thermometer clings around the upper regions, and everything is covered
with dust.  our route leads down the danube in an almost directly southern
course.

instead of the poplars of france, and the apples and pears of germany,
the roads are now fringed with mulberry-trees, both raw and manufactured
silk being a product of this part of hungary.  my companion is what in
england or america would be considered a "character;" he dresses in the
thinnest of racing costumes, through which the broiling sun readily
penetrates, wears racing-shoes, and a small jockey-cap with an enormous
poke, beneath which glints a pair of "specs;" he has rat-trap pedals to
his wheel, and winds a long blue girdle several times around his waist,
consumes raw eggs, wine, milk, a certain hungarian mineral water, and
otherwise excites the awe and admiration of his sport-admiring countrymen.
igali's only fault as a road companion is his utter lack of speed, six
or eight kilometres an hour being his natural pace on average roads,
besides footing it up the gentlest of gradients and over all rough
stretches.  except for this little drawback, he is an excellent man to
take the lead, for he is a genuine magyar, and orders the peasantry about
with the authoritative manner of one born to rule and tyrannize; sometimes,
when, the surface is uneven for wheeling, making them drive their clumsy
ox-wagons almost into the road-side ditch in order to avoid any possible
chance of difficulty in getting past.  igali knows four languages: french,
german, hungarian, and slavonian, but anglaise nicht, though with what
little french and german i have picked up while crossing those countries
we manage to converse and understand each other quite readily, especially
as i am, from constant practice, getting to be an accomplished pantomimist,
and igali is also a pantomimist by nature, and gifted with a versatility
that would make a frenchman envious.  ere we have been five minutes at a
gasthaus igali is usually found surrounded by an admiring circle of
leading citizens - not peasants; igali would not suffer them to gather
about him - pouring into their willing ears the account of my journey;
the words, "san francisco, boston, london, paris, wien, pesth, belgrade,
constantinople, afghanistan, india, khiva," etc., which are repeated in
rotation at wonderfully short intervals, being about all that my linguistic
abilities are capable of grasping.  the road continues hard, but south
of paks it becomes rather rough; consequently halts under the shade of
the mulberry-trees for igali to catch up are of frequent occurrence.

the peasantry, hereabout, seem very kindly disposed and hospitable.
sometimes, while lingering for igali, they will wonder what i am stopping
for, and motion the questions of whether i wish anything to eat or drink;
and this afternoon one of them, whose curiosity to see how i mounted
overcomes his patience, offers me a twenty-kreuzer piece to show him.
at one village a number of peasants take an old cherry-woman to task for
charging me two kreuzers more for some cherries than it appears she
ought, and although two kreuzers are but a farthing they make quite a
squabble with the poor old woman about it, and will be soothed by neither
her voice nor mine until i accept another handful of cherries in lieu
of the overcharged two kreuzers.

szekszard has the reputation, hereabout, of producing the best quality
of red wine in all hungary - no small boast, by the way - and the hotel and
wine-gardens here, among them, support an excellent gypsy band of fourteen
pieces.  mr. garay, the leader of the band, once spent nearly a year in
america, and after supper the band plays, with all the thrilling sweetness
of the hungarian muse, "home, sweet home," "yankee doodle," and "sweet
violets," for my especial delectation.

a wheelman the fame of whose exploits has preceded him might as well try
to wheel through hospitable hungary without breathing its atmosphere as
without drinking its wine; it isn't possible to taboo it as i tabooed
the vin ordinaire of france, hungarians and frenchmen being two entirely
different people.  notwithstanding music until 11.30 p.m., yesterday, we
are on the road before six o'clock this morning - for genuine, unadulterated
hungarian music does not prevent one getting up bright and fresh next
day - and about noon we roll into duna szekeso, igali's native town, where
we have decided to halt for the remainder of the day to get our clothing
washed, one of my shoes repaired, and otherwise prepare for our journey
to the servian capital.  duna szekeso is a calling-place for the danube
steamers, and this afternoon i have the opportunity of taking observations
of a gang of danubian roustabouts at their noontide meal.  they are a
swarthy, wild-looking crowd, wearing long hair parted in the middle, or
not parted at all; to their national costume are added the jaunty trappings
affected by river men in all countries.  their food is coarse black bread
and meat, and they take turns in drinking wine from a wooden tube
protruding from a two-gallon watch-shaped cask, the body of which is
composed of a section of hollow log instead of staves, lifting the cask
up and drinking from the tube, as they would from the bung-hole of a
beer-keg.  their black bread would hardly suit the palate of the western
world; but there are doubtless a few individuals on both sides of the
atlantic who would willingly be transformed into a danubian roustabout
long enough to make the acquaintance of yonder rude cask.

after bathing in the river we call on several of igali's friends, among
them the greek priest and his motherly-looking wife, igali being of the
greek religion.  there appears to be the greatest familiarity between the
priests of these greek churches and their people, and during our brief
visit the priest, languid-eyed, fat, and jolly, his equally fat and jolly
wife, and igali, caress playfully, and cut up as many antics as three
kittens in a bay window.  the farther one travels southward the more
amiable and affectionate in disposition the people seem to become.

five o'clock next morning finds us wheeling out of duna szekeso, and
during the forenoon we pass through baranyavar, a colony of greek hovacs,
where the women are robed in white drapery as scant as the statuary which
the name of their religion calls to memory.  the roads to-day are variable;
there is little but what is ridable, but much that is rough and stony
enough to compel slow and careful wheeling.  early in the evening, as we
wheel over the bridge spanning the river drave, an important tributary
of the danube, into eszek, the capital of slavonia, unmistakable rain-
signs appear above the southern horizon.






chapter vii.




through slavonia and servia.

the editor of der drau, the semi-weekly official organ of the slavonian
capital, and mr. freund, being the two citizens of eszek capable of
speaking english, join voices at the supper-table in hoping it will rain
enough to compel us to remain over to-morrow, that they may have the
pleasure of showing us around eszek and of inviting us to dinner and
supper; and igali, i am constrained to believe, retires to his couch in
full sympathy with them, being possessed of a decided weakness for
stopping over and accepting invitations to dine.  their united wish is
gratified, for when we rise in the morning it is still raining.  eszek
is a fortified city, and has been in time past an important fortress.
it has lost much of its importance since the introduction of modern arms,
for it occupies perfectly level ground, and the fortifications consist
merely of large trenches that have been excavated and walled, with a
view of preventing the city from being taken by storm - not a very
overshadowing consideration in these days, when the usual mode of procedure
is to stand off and bombard a city into the conviction that further
resistance is useless.  after dinner the assistant editor of der drau
comes around and pilots us about the city and its pleasant environments.
the worthy assistant editor is a sprightly, versatile slav, and, as
together we promenade the parks and avenues, the number and extent of
which appear to be the chief glory of eszek, the ceaseless flow of
language and wellnigh continuous interchange of gesticulations between
himself and igali are quite wonderful, and both of them certainly ought
to retire to-night far more enlightened individuals than they found
themselves this morning.

the hungarian seems in a particularly happy and gracious mood to-day,
as i instinctively felt certain he would be if the fates decreed against
a continuation of our journey.  when our companion' s conversation turns
on any particularly interesting subject i am graciously given the benefit
of it to the extent of some french or german word the meaning of which,
igali has discovered, i understand.  during the afternoon we wander through
the intricacies of a yew-shrub maze, where a good-sized area of impenetrably
thick vegetation has been trained and trimmed into a bewildering net-work
of arched walks that almost exclude the light, and igali pauses to favor
me with the information that this maze is the favorite trysting place
of slavonian nymphs and swains, and furthermore expresses his opinion
that the spot must be indeed romantic and an appropriate place to "come
a-wooin' " on nights when the moonbeams, penetrating through a thousand
tiny interspaces, convert the gloomy interior into chambers of dancing
light and shadow.  all this information and these comments are embodied
in the two short words, "amour, lima" accompanied by a few gesticulations,
and is a fair sample of the manner in which conversation is carried on
between us.  it is quite astonishing how readily two persons constantly
together will come to understand each other through the medium of a few
words which they know the meaning of in common.  scores of ladies and
gentlemen, the latter chiefly military officers, are enjoying a promenade
in the rain-cooled atmosphere, and there is no mistaking the glances of
interest with which many of them favor-igali.  his pronounced sportsmanlike
make-up attracts universal attention and causes everybody to mistake him
for myself - a kindly office which i devoutly wish he would fill until the
whole journey is accomplished.  in the casino garden a dozen bearded
musicians are playing slavonian airs, and, by request of the assistant
editor, they play and sing the slavonian national anthem and a popular
air or two besides.  the national musical instrument of slavonia is the
"tamborica"-a small steel-stringed instrument that is twanged with a
chip-like piece of wood.  their singing is excellent in its way, but to
the writer's taste there is no comparison between their tamboricas and
the gypsy music of hungary.  there are no bicycles in all eszek save ours -
though mr. freund, who has lately returned from paris, has ordered one,
with which he expects to win the admiration of all his countrymen - and
igali and myself are lionized to our hearts' content; but this evening
we are quite startled and taken aback by the reappearance of the assistant
editor, excitedly announcing the arrival of a tricycle in town.  upon
going down, in breathless anticipation of summarily losing the universal
admiration of eszek, we find an itinerant cobbler, who has constructed
a machine that would make the rudest bone-shaker of ancient memory seem
like the most elegant product of hartford or coventry in comparison.  the
backbone and axle-tree are roughly hewn sticks of wood, ironed equally
rough at the village blacksmith's; and as, for a twenty-kreuzer piece,
the rider mounts and wobbles all over the sidewalk for a short distance,
the spectacle would make a stoic roar with laughter, and the good people
of the lower danubian provinces are anything but stoical.  six o'clock
next morning finds us travelling southward into the interior of slavonia;
but we are not mounted, for the road presents an unridable surface of
mud, stones, and ruts, that causes my companion's favorite ejaculatory
expletive to occur with more than its usual frequency.  for a portion of
the way there is a narrow sidepath that is fairly ridable, but an
uninvitingly deep ditch runs unpleasantly near, and no amount of persuasion
can induce my companion to attempt wheeling along it.  igali's bump of
cautiousness is fully developed, and day by day, as we journey together,
i am becoming more and more convinced that he would be an invaluable
companion to have accompany one around the world; true, the journey would
occupy a decade, or thereabout, but one would be morally certain of
coming out safe and sound in the end.  during our progression southward
there has been a perceptible softening in the disposition of the natives,
this being more noticeably a marked characteristic of the slavonians;
the generous southern sun, shining on the great area of oriental gentleness,
casts a softening influence toward the sterner north, imparting to the
people amiable and genial dispositions.  it takes but comparatively small
deeds to win the admiration and applause of the natives of the lower
danube, with their childlike manners; and, by slowly meandering along
the roadways of southern hungary occasionally with his bicycle, igali
has become the pride and admiration of thousands.

for mile after mile we have to trundle our way slowly along the muddy
highway as best we can, our road leading through a flat and rather swampy
area of broad, waving wheat-fields; we relieve the tedium of the journey
by whistling, alternately, "yankee doodle," to which igali has taken
quite a fancy since first hearing it played by the gypsy band in the
wine-garden at szekszard three days ago, and the hungarian national air -
this latter, of course, falling to igali's share of the entertainment.
having been to college in paris, igali is also able to contribute the
famous marseillaise hymn, and, not to be outdone, i favor him with " god
save the queen" and "britannia rules the waves," both of which he thinks
very good tunes-the former seeming to strike his hungarian ear, however,
as rather solemn.  in the middle of the forenoon we make a brief halt at
a rude road-side tavern for some refreshments - a thick, narrow slice of
raw, fat bacon, white with salt, and a level pint of red wine, satisfying
my companion; but i substitute for the bacon a slice of coarse, black
bread, much to igali's wonderment.  here are congregated several slavonian
shepherds, in their large, ill-fitting, sheepskin garments, with the
long wool turned inward-clothes that apparently serve them alike to keep
out the summer's heat and the winter's cold.  one of the peasants, with
ideas a trifle befuddled with wine, perhaps, and face all aglow with
admiration for our bicycles, produces a tattered memorandum and begs us
to favor him with our autographs, an act that of itself proves him to
be not without a degree of intelligence one would scarcely look for in
a sheepskin-clad shepherd of slavonia.  igali gruffly bids the man
"begone," and aims a careless kick at the proffered memorandum; but seeing
no harm in the request, and, moreover, being perhaps by nature a trifle
more considerate of others, i comply.  as he reads aloud, "united states,
america," to his comrades, they one and all lift their hats quite
reverently and place their brown hands over their hearts, for i suppose
they recognize in my ready compliance with the simple request, in
comparison with igali's rude rebuff-which, by the way, no doubt comes
natural enough-the difference between the land of the prince and peasant,
and the land where "liberty, equality, and fraternity" is not a meaningless
motto - a land which i find every down-trodden peasant of europe has heard
of, and looks upward to.

soon after this incident we are passing a prune-orchard, when, as though
for our especial benefit, a couple of peasants working there begin singing
aloud, and with evident enthusiasm, some national melody, and as they
observe not our presence, at my suggestion we crouch behind a convenient
clump of bushes and for several minutes are favored with as fine a duet
as i have heard for many a day; but the situation becomes too ridiculous
for igali, and it finally sends him into a roar of laughter that causes
the performance to terminate abruptly, and, rising into full view, we
doubtless repay the singers by letting them see us mount and ride into
their native village, but a few hundred yards distant.  we are to-day
passing through villages where a bicycle has never been seen - this being
outside the area of igali's peregrinations - and the whole population
invariably turns out en masse, clerks, proprietors, and customers in the
shops unceremoniously dropping everything and running to the streets;
there is verily a hurrying to and fro of all the citizens; husbands
hastening from magazine to dwelling to inform their wives and families,
mothers running to call their children, children their parents, and
everybody scampering to call the attention of their sisters, cousins,
and aunts, ere we are vanished in the distance, and it be everlastingly
too late.

we have been worrying along at some sort of pace, with the exception of
the usual noontide halt, since six o'clock this morning, and the busy
mosquito is making life interesting for belated wayfarers, when we ride
into sarengrad and put up at the only gasthaus in the village.  our bedroom
is situated on the ground floor, the only floor in fact the gaathaus
boasts, and we are in a fair way of either being lulled to sleep or kept
awake, as the case may be, by a howling chorus of wine-bibbers in the
public room adjoining; but here, again, igali shows up to good advantage
by peremptorily ordering the singers to stop, and stop instanter.  the
amiably disposed peasants, notwithstanding the wine they have been
drinking, cease their singing and become silent and circumspect, in
deference to the wishes of the two strangers with the wonderful machines.
we now make a practice of taking our bicycles into our bedroom with us
at night, otherwise every right hand in the whole village would busy
itself pinching the "gum-elastic" tires and pedal-rubbers, twirling the
pedals, feeling spokes, backbone, and forks, and critically examining
and commenting upon every visible portion of the mechanism; and who knows
but that the latent cupidity of some easy-conscienced villager might be
aroused at the unusual sight of so much "silver" standing around loose
(the natives hereabout don't even ask whether the nickelled parts of the
bicycle are silver or not; they take it for granted to be so), and
surreptitiously attempt to chisel off enough to purchase an embroidered
coat for sundays.  from what i can understand of their comments among
themselves, it is perfectly consistent with their ideas of the average
englishman that he should bestride a bicycle of solid silver, and if
their vocabulary embraced no word corresponding to our "millionnaire,"
and they desired to use one, they would probably pick upon the word
"englander" as the most appropriate.  while we are making our toilets in
the morning eager faces are peering inquisitively through the bedroom
windows; a murmur of voices, criticizing us and our strange vehicles,
greets our waking moments, and our privacy is often invaded, in spite
of igali's inconsiderate treatment of them whenever they happen to cross
his path.

many of the inhabitants of this part of slavonia are croatians - people
who are noted for their fondness of finery; and, as on this sunny sunday
morning we wheel through their villages, the crowds of peasantry who
gather about us in all the bravery of their best clothes present, indeed,
an appearance gay and picturesque beyond anything hitherto encountered.
the garments of the men are covered with braid-work and silk embroidery
wherever such ornamentation is thought to be an embellishment, and, to
the croatian mind, that means pretty much everywhere; and the girls and
women are arrayed in the gayest of colors; those displaying the brightest
hues and the greatest contrasts seem to go tripping along conscious of
being irresistible.  many of the croatian peasants are fine, strapping
fellows, and very handsome women are observed in the villages - women with
great, dreamy eyes, and faces with an expression of languor that bespeaks
their owners to be gentleness personified.  igali shows evidence of more
susceptibility to female charms than i should naturally have given him
credit for, and shows a decided inclination to linger in these beauty-blessed
villages longer than is necessary, and as one dark-eyed damsel after
another gathers around us, i usually take the initiative in mounting and
clearing out.

were a man to go suddenly flapping his way through the streets of london
on the long-anticipated flying-machine, the average cockney would scarce
betray the unfeigned astonishment that is depicted on the countenances
of these croatian villagers as we nde into their midst and dismount.

this afternoon my bicycle causes the first runaway since the trifling
affair at lembach, austria.  a brown-faced peasant woman and a little
girl, driving a small, shaggy pony harnessed to a basket-work, four-wheeled
vehicle, are approaching; their humble-looking steed betrays no evidence
of restiveness until just as i am turning out to pass him, when, without
warning, he gives a swift, sudden bound to the right, nearly upsetting
the vehicle, and without more ado bolts down a considerable embankment
and goes helter-skelter across a field of standing grain.  the old lady
pluckily hangs on to the reins, and finally succeeds in bringing the
runaway around into the road again without damaging anything save the
corn.  it might have ended much less satisfactorily, however, and the
incident illustrates one possible source of trouble to a 'cycler travelling
alone through countries where the people neither understand, nor can be
expected to understand, a wheelman's position; the situation would, of
course, be aggravated in a country village where, not speaking the
language, one could not make himself understood in his own defence.  these
people here, if not wise as serpents, are at least harmless as doves;
but, in case of the bicycle frightening a team and causing a runaway
with the unpleasant sequel of broken limbs, or injured horse, they would
scarce know what to do in the premises, since they would have no precedent
to govern them, and, in the absence of any intelligent guidance, might
conclude to wreak summary vengeance on the bicycle.  in such a case, would
a wheelman be justified in using his revolver to defend his bicycle ?

such is the reverie into which i fall while reclining beneath a spreading
mulberry-tree waiting for igali to catch up; for he has promised that i
shall see the slavonian national dance sometime to-day, and a village
is now visible in the distance.  at the danube-side village of hamenitz
an hour's halt is decided upon to give me the promised opportunity of
witnessing the dance in its native land.  it is a novel and interesting
sight.  a round hundred young gallants and maidens are rigged out in
finery such as no other people save the croatian and slavonian peasants
ever wear - the young men braided and embroidered, and the damsels having
their hair entwined with a profusion of natural flowers in addition to
their costumes of all possible hues.  forming themselves into a large
ring, distributed so that the sexes alternate, the young men extend and
join their hands in front of the maidens, and the latter join hands
behind their partners; the steel-strung tamboricas strike up a lively
twanging air, to which the circle of dancers endeavor to shuffle time
with their feet, while at the same time moving around in a circle livelier
and faster twang the tamboricas, and more and more animated becomes the
scene as the dancing, shuffling ring endeavors to keep pace with it.  as
the fun progresses into the fast and furious stages the youths' hats
have a knack of getting into a jaunty position on the side of their
heads, and the wearers' faces assume a reckless, flushed appearance,
like men half intoxicated while the maidens' bright eyes and beaming
faces betoken unutterable happiness; finally the music and the shuffling
of feet terminate with a rapid flourish, everybody kisses everybody - save,
of course, mere luckless onlookers like igali and myself - and the slavonian
national dance is ended.

to-night we reach the strongly fortified town of peterwardein, opposite
which, just across a pontoon bridge spanning the danube, is the larger
city of neusatz.  at hamenitz we met professor zaubaur, the editor of the
uj videk, who came down the danube ahead of us by steamboat; and now,
after housing our machines at our gasthaus in peterwardein, he pilots
us across the pontoon bridge in the twilight, and into one of those wine-
gardens so universal in this part of the world.  here at neusatz i listen
to the genuine hungarian gypsy music for the last time on the european
tour ere bidding the territory of hungary adieu, for neusatz is on the
hungarian side of the danube.  the professor has evidently let no grass
grow beneath his feet since leaving us scarcely an hour ago at hamenitz,
for he has, in the mean time, ferreted out the only english-speaking
person at present in town, the good frau schrieber, an austrian lady,
formerly of vienna, but now at neusatz with her husband, a well-known
advocate.  this lady talks english quite fluently.  though not yet twenty-five
she is very, very wise, and among other things she informs her admiring
friends gathered round about us, listening to the - to them - unintelligible
flow of a foreign language, that englishmen are "very grave beings," a
piece of information that wrings from igali a really sympathetic response-
nothing less than the startling announcement that he hasn't seen me smile
since we left budapest together, a week ago.  "having seen the slavonian,
i ought by all means to see the hungarian national dance," frau schrieber
says; adding, "it is a nice dance for englishmen to look at, though it
is so very gay that english ladies would neither dance it nor look at
it being danced." ere parting company with this entertaining lady she
agrees that, if i will but remain in hungary permanently, she knows of
a very handsome fraulein of sixteen summers, who, having heard of my
"wonderful journey," is already predisposed in my favor, and with a
little friendly tact and management on her - frau schrieber's - part would
no doubt be willing to waive the formalities of a long courtship, and
yield up hand and heart at my request.  i can scarcely think of breaking
in twain my trip around the world even for so tempting a prospect, and
i recommend the fair hungarian to igali; but "the fraulein has never
heard of herr igali, and he will not do."

"will the fraulein be willing to wait until my journey around the world
is completed."

"yes; she vill vait mit much pleezure; i vill zee dat she vait; und i
know you vill return, for an englishman alvays forgets his promeezes."
henceforth, when igali and myself enter upon a programme of whistling,
"yankee doodle" is supplanted by "the girl i left behind me," much
to his annoyance, since, not understanding the sentiment responsible for
the change, bethinks "yankee doodle" a far better tune.  so much attached,
in fact, has igali become to the american national air, that he informs
the professor and editor of uj videk of the circumstance of the band
playing it at szekszard.  as, after supper, several of us promenade the
streets of neusatz, the professor links his arm in mine, and, taking the
cue from igali, begs me to favor him by whistling it.  i try my best to
palm this patriotic duty off on igali, by paying flattering compliments
to his style of whistling; but, after all, the duty falls on me, and i
whistle the tune softly, yet merrily, as we walk along, the professor,
spectacled and wise-looking, meanwhile exchanging numerous nods of
recognition with his fellow-neusatzers we meet.  the provost-judge of
neusatz shares the honors with frau schrieber of knowing more or less
english; but this evening the judge is out of town.  the enterprising
professor lies in wait for him, however, and at 5.30 on monday morning,
while we are dressing, an invasion of our bed-chamber is made by the
professor, the jolly-looking and portly provost-judge, a slavonian
lieutenant of artillery, and a druggist friend of the others.  the provost-
judge and the lieutenant actually own bicycles and ride them, the only
representatives of the wheel in neusatz and peterwardein, and the judge
is " very angry " - as he expresses it - that monday is court day, and to-day
an unusually busy one, for he would be most happy to wheel with us to
belgrade.

the lieutenant fetches his wheel and accompanies us to the next village.
peterwardein is a strongly fortified place, and, as a poition commanding
the danube so completely, is furnished with thirty guns of large calibre,
a battery certainly not to be despised when posted on a position so
commanding as the hill on which peterwardein fortress is built.  as the
editor and others at eszek, so here the professor, the judge, and the
druggist unite in a friendly protest against my attempt to wheel through
asia, and more especially through china, "for everybody knows it is
quite dangerous," they say.  these people cannot possibly understand why
it is that an englishman or american, knowing of danger beforehand, will
still venture ahead; and when, in reply to their questions, i modestly
announce my intention of going ahead, notwithstanding possible danger
and probable difficulties, they each, in turn, shake my hand as though
reluctantly resigning me to a reckless determination, and the judge,
acting as spokesman, and echoing and interpreting the sentiments of his
companions, exclaims, "england and america forever! it is ze grandest
peeples on ze world!" the lieutenant, when questioned on the subject by
the judge and the professor, simply shrugs his shoulders and says nothing,
as becomes a man whose first duty is to cultivate a supreme contempt for
danger in all its forms.

they all accompany us outside the city gates, when, after mutual farewells
and assurances of good-will, we mount and wheel away down the danube,
the lieutenant's big mastiff trotting soberly alongside his master, while
igali, sometimes in and sometimes out of sight behind, brings up the
rear.  after the lieutenant leaves us we have to trundle our weary way
up the steep gradients of the fruskagora mountains for a number of
kilometres.  for igali it is quite an adventurous morning.  ere we had
left the shadows of peterwardein fortress he upset while wheeling beneath
some overhanging mulberry-boughs that threatened destruction to his
jockey-cap; soon after parting company with the lieutenant he gets into
an altercation with a gang of gypsies about being the cause of their
horses breaking loose from their picket-ropes and stampeding, and then
making uncivil comments upon the circumstance; an hour after this he
overturns again and breaks a pedal, and when we dismount at indjia, for
our noontide halt, he discovers that his saddle-spring has snapped in
the middle.  as he ruefully surveys the breakage caused by the roughness
of the fruskagora roads, and sends out to scour the village for a mechanic
capable of undertaking the repairs, he eyes my columbia wistfully, and
asks me for the address where one like it can be obtained.  the blacksmith
is not prepared to mend the spring, although he makes a good job of the
pedal, and it takes a carpenter and his assistant from 1.30 to 4.30 p.m.
to manufacture a grooved piece of wood to fit between the spring and
backbone so that he can ride with me to belgrade.  it would have been a
fifteen-minute task for a yankee carpenter.  we have been traversing a
spur of the fruskagora mountains all the morning, and our progress has
been slow.  the roads through here are mainly of the natural soil, and
correspondingly bad; but the glorious views of the danube, with its
alternating wealth of green woods and greener cultivated areas, fully
recompense for the extra toil.  prune-orchards, the trees weighed down
with fruit yet green, clothe the hill-sides with their luxuriance; indeed,
the whole broad, rich valley of the danube seems nodding and smiling in
the consciousness of overflowing plenty; for days we have traversed roads
leading through vineyards and orchards, and broad areas with promising-looking
grain-crops.

it is but thirty kilometres from indjia to semlin, on the riverbank
opposite belgrade, and since leaving the fruskagora mountains the country
has been a level plain, and the roads fairly smooth.  but igali has
naturally become doubly cautious since his succession of misadventures
this morning, and as, while waiting for him to overtake me, i recline
beneath the mulberry-trees near the village of batainitz and survey the
blue mountains of servia looming up to the southward through the evening
haze, he rides up and proposes batainitz as our halting-place for the
night, adding persuasively, "there will be no ferry-boat across to
belgrade to-night, and we can easily catch the first boat in the morning."
i reluctantly agree, though advocating going on to semlin this evening.
while our supper is being prepared we are taken in hand by the leading
merchant of the village and "turned loose" in an orchard of small
fruits and early pears, and from thence conducted to a large gypsy
encampment in the outskirts of the village, where, in acknowledgment of
the honor of our visit-and a few kreuzers by way of supplement - the
"flower of the camp," a blooming damsel, about the shade of a total
eclipse, kisses the backs of our hands, and the men play a strumming
monotone with sticks and an inverted wooden trough, while the women dance
in a most lively and not ungraceful manner.  these gypsy bands are a happy
crowd of vagabonds, looking as though they had never a single care in
all the world; the men wear long, flowing hair, and to the ordinary
costume of the peasant is added many a gewgaw, worn with a careless
jaunty grace that fails not to carry with it a certain charm in spite
of unkempt locks and dirty faces.  the women wear a minimum of clothes
and a profusion of beads and trinkets, and the children go stark naked
or partly dressed.

unmistakable evidence that one is approaching the orient appears in the
semi-oriental costumes. of the peasantry and roving gypsy bands, as we
gradually near the servian capital.  an oriental costume in eszek is
sufficiently exceptional to be a novelty, and so it is until one gets
south of peterwardein, when the national costumes of slavonia and croatia
are gradually merged into the tasselled fez, the many-folded waistband,
and the loose, flowing pantaloons of eastern lands.  here at batainitz
the feet are encased in rude raw-hide moccasins, bound on with leathern
thongs, and the ankle and calf are bandaged with many folds of heavy red
material, also similarly bound.  the scene around our gasthaus, after our
arrival, resembles a popular meeting; for, although a few of the villagers
have been to belgrade and seen a bicycle, it is only within the last six
months that belgrade itself has boasted one, and the great majority of
the batainitz people have simply heard enough about them to whet their
curiosity for a closer acquaintance.  more-over, from the interest taken
in my tour at belgrade on account of the bicycle's recent introduction
in that capital, these villagers, but a dozen kilometres away, have heard
more of my journey than people in villages farther north, and their
curiosity is roused in proportion.

we are astir by five o'clock next morning; but the same curious crowd
is making the stone corridors of the rambling old gasthaus impassable,
and filling the space in front, gazing curiously at us, and commenting
on our appearance whenever we happen to become visible, while waiting
with commendable patience to obtain a glimpse of our wonderful machines.
they are a motley, and withal a ragged assembly; old women devoutly cross
themselves as, after a slight repast of bread and milk, we sally forth
with our wheels, prepared to start; and the spontaneous murmur of
admiration which breaks forth as we mount becomes louder and more
pronounced as i turn in the saddle and doff my helmet in deference to
the homage paid us by hearts which are none the less warm because hidden
beneath the rags of honest poverty and semi-civilization.  it takes but
little to win the hearts of these rude, unsophisticated people.  a two
hours' ride from batainitz, over level and reasonably smooth roads,
brings us into semlin, quite an important slavonian city on the danube,
nearly opposite belgrade, which is on the same side, but separated from
it by a large tributary called the save.  ferry-boats ply regularly between
the two cities, and, after an hour spent in hunting up different officials
to gain permission for igali to cross over into servian territory without
having a regular traveller's passport, we escape from the madding crowds
of semlinites by boarding the ferry-boat, and ten minutes later are
exchanging signals! with three servian wheelmen, who have come down to
the landing in full uniform to meet and welcome us to belgrade.  many
readers will doubtless be as surprised as i was to learn that at belgrade,
the capital of the little kingdom of servia, independent only since the
treaty of berlin, a bicycle club was organized in january, 1885, and
that now, in june of the same year, they have a promising club of thirty
members, twelve of whom are riders owning their own wheels.  their club
is named, in french, la societe velocipedique serbe; in the servian
language it is unpronounceable to an anglo-saxon, and printable only
with slav type.  the president, milorade m.  nicolitch terzibachitch, is
the cyclists' touring club consul for servia, and is the southeastern
picket of that organization, their club being the extreme 'cycle outpost
in this direction.  our approach has been announced beforehand, and the
club has thoughtfully "seen" the servian authorities, and so far
smoothed the way for our entrance into their country that the officials
do not even make a pretence of examining my passport or packages - an
almost unprecedented occurrence, i should say, since they are more
particular about passports here than perhaps in any other european
country, save russia and turkey.  here at belgrade i am to part company
with igali, who, by the way, has applied for, and just received, his
certificate of appointment to the cyclists' touring club consulship of
duna szekeso and mohacs, an honor of which he feels quite proud.  true,
there is no other 'cycler in his whole district, and hardly likely to
be for some time to corne; but i can heartily recommend him to any
wandering wheelman happening down the danube valley on a tour; he knows
the best wine-cellars in all the country round, and, besides being an
agreeable and accommodating road companion, will prove a salutary check
upon the headlong career of anyone disposed to over-exertion.  i am not
yet to be abandoned entirely to my own resources, however; these hospitable
servian wheelmen couldn't think of such a thing.  i am to remain over as
their guest till to-morrow afternoon, when mr. douchan popovitz, the
best rider in belgrade, is delegated to escort me through servia to the
bulgarian frontier.  when i get there i shall not be much astonished to
see a bulgarian wheelman offer to escort me to roumelia, and so on clear
to constantinople; for i certainly never expected to find so jolly and
enthusiastic a company of 'cyclers in this corner of the world.

the good fellowship and hospitality of this servian club know no bounds;
igali and i are banqueted and driven about in carriages all day.

belgrade is a strongly fortified city, occupying a commanding hill
overlooking the danube; it is a rare old town, battle-scarred and rugged;
having been a frontier position of importance in a country that has been
debatable ground between turk and christian for centuries, it has been
a coveted prize to be won and lost on the diplomatic chess-board, or,
worse still, the foot-ball of contending armies and wrangling monarchs.
long before the ottoman turks first appeared, like a small dark cloud,
no bigger than a man's hand, upon the southeastern horizon of europe,
to extend and overwhelm the budding flower of christianity and civilization
in these fairest portions of the continent, belgrade was an important
roman fortress, and to-day its national museum and antiquarian stores
are particularly rich in the treasure-trove of byzantine antiquities,
unearthed from time to time in the fortress itself and the region round
about that came under its protection.  so plentiful, indeed, are old coins
and relics of all sorts at belgrade, that, as i am standing looking at
the collection in the window of an antiquary shop, the proprietor steps
out and presents me a small handful of copper coins of byzantium as a
sort of bait that might perchance tempt one to enter and make a closer
inspection of his stock.  by the famous treaty of berlin the servians
gained their complete independence, and their country, from a principality,
paying tribute to the sultan, changed to an independent kingdom with a
servian on the throne, owing allegiance to nobody, and the people have
not yet ceased to show, in a thousand little ways, their thorough
appreciation of the change; besides filling the picture-galleries of
their museum with portraits of servian heroes, battle-flags, and other
gentle reminders of their past history, they have, among other practical
methods of manifesting how they feel about the departure of the dominating
crescent from among them, turned the leading turkish mosque into a gas-
house.  one of the most interesting relics in the servian capital is an
old roman well, dug from the brow of the fortress hill to below the level
of the danube, for furnishing water to the city when cut off from the
river by a besieging army.  it is an enormous affair, a tubular brick
wall about forty feet in circumference and two hundred and fifty feet
deep, outside of which a stone stairway, winding round and round the
shaft, leads from top to bottom.  openings through the wall, six feet
high and three wide, occur at regular intervals all the way down, and,
as we follow our ragged guide down, down into the damp and darkness by
the feeble light of a tallow candle in a broken lantern, i cannot help
thinking that these o'erhandy openings leading into the dark, watery
depths have, in the tragic history of belgrade, doubtless been responsible
for the mysterious disappearance of more than one objectionable person.
it is not without certain involuntary misgivings that i take the lantern
from the guide - whose general appearance is, by the way, hardly calculated
to be reassuring - and, standing in one of the openings, peer down into
the darksome depths, with him hanging on to my coat as an act of precaution.

the view from the ramparts of belgrade fortress is a magnificent panorama,
extending over the broad valley of the danube - which here winds about
as though trying to bestow its favors with impartiality upon hungary,
servia, and slavonia - and of the save.  the servian soldiers are camped
in small tents in various parts of the fortress grounds and its environments,
or lolling under the shade of a few scantily verdured trees, for the sun
is to-day broiling hot.  with a population not exceeding one and a half
million, i am told that servia supports a standing army of a hundred
thousand men; and, when required, every man in servia becomes a soldier.
as one lands from the ferry-boat and looks about him he needs no interpreter
to inform him that he has left the occident on the other side of the
save, and to the observant stranger the streets of belgrade furnish many
a novel and interesting sight in the way of fanciful costumes and phases
of oriental life here encountered for the first time.  in the afternoon
we visit the national museum of old coins, arms, and eoman and servian
antiquities.  a banquet in a wine-garden, where servian national music
is dispensed by a band of female musicians, is given us in the evening
by the club, and royal quarters are assigned us for the night at the
hospitable mansion of mr. terzibachitch's father, who is the merchant
-prince of servia, and purveyor to the court.  wednesday morning we take
a general ramble over the city, besides visiting the club's head-quarters,
where we find a handsome new album has been purchased for receiving our
autographs.  the belgrade wheelmen have names painted on their bicycles,
as names are painted on steamboats or yachts: "fairy," "good luck," and
"servian queen," being fair specimens.  the cyclers here are sons of
leading citizens and business men of belgrade, and, while they dress and
conduct themselves as becomes thorough gentlemen, one fancies detecting
a certain wild expression of the eye, as though their civilization were
scarcely yet established; in fact, this peculiar expression is more
noticeable at belgrade, and is apparently more general here than at any
other place i visit in europe.  i apprehend it to be a peculiarity that
has become hereditary with the citizens, from their city having been so
often and for so long the theatre of uncertain fate and distracting
political disturbances.  it is the half-startled expression of people
with the ever-present knowledge of insecurity.  but they are a warm-hearted,
impulsive set of fellows, and when, while looking through the museum,
we happen across her britannic majesty's representative at the servian
court, who is doing the same thing, one of them unhesitatingly approaches
that gentleman, cap in hand, and, with considerable enthusiasm of manner,
announces that they have with them a countryman of his who is riding
around the world on a bicycle.  this cooler-blooded and dignified gentleman
is not near so demonstrative in his acknowledgment as they doubtless
anticipated he would be; whereat they appear quite puzzled and mystified.

three carriages with cyclers and their friends accompany us a dozen
kilometres out to a wayside mehana (the oriental name hereabouts for
hotels, wayside inns, etc.); douchan popovitz, and hugo tichy, the captain
of the club, will ride forty-five kilometres with me to semendria, and
at 4 o'clock we mount our wheels and ride away southward into servia.
arriving at the mehana, wine is brought, and then the two servians
accompanying me, and those returning, kiss each other, after the manner
and custom of their country; then a general hand-shaking and well-wishes
all around, and the carriages turn toward belgrade, while we wheelmen
alternately ride and trundle over a muddy - for it has rained since noon - and
mountainous road till 7.30, when relatives of douchan popovitz, in the
village of grotzka, kindly offer us the hospitality of their house till
morning, which we hesitate not to avail ourselves of.  when about to part
at the mehana, the immortal igali unwinds from around his waist that
long blue girdle, the arranging and rearranging of which has been a
familiar feature of the last week's experiences, and presents it to me
for a souvenir of himself, a courtesy which i return by presenting him
with several of the byzantine coins given to me by the belgrade antiquary
as before mentioned.  beyond semendria, where the captain leaves us for
the return journey, we leave the course of the danube, which i have been
following in a general way for over two weeks, and strike due southward
up the smaller, but not less beautiful, valley of the morava river, where
we have the intense satisfaction of finding roads that are both dry and
level, enabling us, in spite of the broiling heat, to bowl along at a
sixteen-kilometre pace to the village, where we halt for dinner and the
usual three hours noontide siesta.  seeing me jotting down my notes with
a short piece of lead-pencil, the proprietor of the mehana at semendria,
where we take a parting glass of wine with the captain, and who admires
america and the americans, steps in-doors for a minute, and returns with
a telescopic pencil-case, attached to a silken cord of the servian"
national colors, which he places abound my neck, requesting me to wear
it around the world, and, when i arrive at my journey's end, sometimes
to think of servia.

with igali's sky-blue girdle encompassing my waist, and the servian
national colors fondly encircling my neck, i begin to feel quite a
heraldic tremor creeping over me, and actually surprise myself casting
wistful glances at the huge antiquated horse pistol stuck in yonder bull-
whacker's ample waistband; moreover, i really think that a pair of these
servian moccasins would not be bad foot-gear for riding the bicycle.  all
up the morava valley the roads continue far better than i have expected
to find in servia, and we wheel merrily along, the resara mountains
covered with dark pine forests, skirting the valley on the right, sometimes
rising into peaks of quite respectable proportions.  the sun sinks behind
the receding hills, it grows dusk, and finally dark, save the feeble
light vouchsafed by the new moon, and our destination still lies several
kilometres ahead.  but at about nine we roll safely into jagodina, well-
satisfied with the consciousness of having covered one hundred and forty-
five kilometres to-day, in spite of delaying our start in the morning
until eight o'clock, and the twenty kilometres of indifferent road between
grotzka and semendria.  there has been no reclining under road-side
mulberry-trees for my companion to catch up to-day, however; the servian
wheelman is altogether a speedier man than igali, and, whether the road
is rough or smooth, level or hilly, he is found close behind my rear
wheel; my own shadow follows not more faithfully than does the "best
rider in servia."

we start for jagodina at 5.30 next morning, finding the roads a little
heavy with sand in places, but otherwise all that a wheelman could wish.
crossing a bridge over the morava river, into tchupria, we are required
not only to foot it across, but to pay a toll for the bicycles, like any
other wheeled vehicle.  at tchupria it seems as though the whole town
must be depopulated, so great is the throng of citizens that swarm about
us.  motley and picturesque even in their rags, one's pen utterly fails
to convey a correct idea of their appearance; besides servians, bulgarians,
and turks, and the greek priests who never fail of being on hand, now
appear roumanians, wearing huge sheep-skin busbies, with the long, ragged
edges of the wool dangling about eyes and ears, or, in the case of a
more "dudish " person, clipped around smooth at the brim, making the
head-gear look like a small, round, thatched roof.  urchins, whose daily
duty is to promenade the family goat around the streets, join in the
procession, tugging their bearded charges after them; and a score of
dogs, overjoyed beyond measure at the general commotion, romp about, and
bark their joyous approval of it all.  to have crowds like this following
one out of town makes a sensitive person feel uncomfortably like being
chased out of a community for borrowing chickens by moonlight, or on
account of some irregularity concerning hotel bills.  on occasions like
this orientals seemingly have not the slightest sense of dignity; portly,
well-dressed citizens, priests, and military officers press forward among
the crowds of peasants and unwashed frequenters of the streets, evidently
more delighted with things about them than they have been for many a day
before.

at delegrad we wheel through the battle-field of the same name, where,
in 1876, turks and servians were arrayed against each other.  these battle-
scarred hills above delegrad command a glorious view of the lower morava
valley, which is hereabouts most beautiful, and just broad enough for
its entire beauty to be comprehended.  the servians won the battle of
delegrad, and as i pause to admire the glorious prospect to the southward
from the hills, methinks their general showed no little sagacity in
opposing the invaders at a spot where the morava vale, the jewel of
servia, was spread out like a panorama below his position, to fan with
its loveliness the patriotism of his troops - they could not do otherwise
than win, with the fairest portion of their well-beloved country spread
out before them like a picture.  a large cannon, captured from the turks,
is standing on its carriage by the road-side, a mute but eloquent witness
of servian prowess.

a few miles farther on we halt for dinner at alexinatz, near the old
servian boundary-line, also the scene of one of the greatest battles
fought during the servian struggle for independence.  the turks were
victorious this time, and fifteen thousand servians and three thousand
russian allies yielded up their lives here to superior turkish generalship,
and alexiuatz was burned to ashes.  the russians have erected a granite
monument on a hill overlooking the town, in memory of their comrades who
perished in this fight.  the roads to-day average even better than
yesterday, and at six o'clock we roll into nisch, one hundred and twenty
kilometres from our starting-point this morning, and two hundred and
eighty from belgrade.  as we enter the city a gang of convicts working
on the fortifications forget their clanking shackles and chains, and the
miseries of their state, long enough to greet us with a boisterous howl
of approval, and the guards who are standing over them for once, at
least, fail to check them, for their attention, too, is wholly engrossed
in the same wondrous subject.  nisch appears to be a thoroughly oriental
city, and here i see the first turkish ladies, with their features hidden
behind their white yashmaks.  at seven or eight o'clock in the morning,
when it is comparatively cool and people are patronizing the market,
trafficking and bartering for the day's supply of provisions, the streets
present quite an animated appearance; but during the heat of the day the
scene changes to one of squalor and indolence; respectable citizens are
smoking nargilehs (mark twain's "hubble-bubble"), or sleeping somewhere
out of sight; business is generally suspended, and in every shady nook
and corner one sees a swarthy ragamuffin stretched out at full length,
perfectly happy and contented if only he is allowed to snooze the hours
away in peace.

human nature is verily the same the world over, and here, in the hotel
at nisch, i meet an individual who recalls a few of the sensible questions
that have been asked me from time to time at different places on both
continents.  this nisch interrogator is a hebrew commercial traveller,
who has a smattering of english, and who after ascertaining during a
short conversation that, when a range of mountains or any other small
obstruction is encountered, i get down and push the bicycle up, airs his
knowledge of english and of 'cycling to the extent of inquiring whether
i don't take a man along to push it up the hills!

riding out of nisch this morning we stop just beyond the suburbs to take
a curious look at a grim monument of turkish prowess, in the shape of a
square stone structure which the turks built in 1840, and then faced the
whole exterior with grinning rows of servian skulls partially embedded
in mortar.  the servians, naturally objecting to having the skulls of
their comrades thus exposed to the gaze of everybody, have since removed
and buried them; but the rows of indentations in the thick mortared
surface still bear unmistakable evidence of the nature of their former
occupants.  an avenue of thrifty prune-trees shades a level road leading
out of nisch for several kilometres, but a heavy thunder-storm during
the night has made it rather slavish wheeling, although the surface
becomes harder and smoother, also hillier, as we gradually approach the
balkan mountains, that tower well up toward cloudland immediately ahead.
the morning is warm and muggy, indicating rain, and the long, steep
trundle, kilometre after kilometre, up the balkan slopes, is anything
but child's play, albeit the scenery is most lovely, one prospect
especially reminding me of a view in the big horn mountains of northern
wyoming territory.  on the lower slopes we come to a mehana, where, besides
plenty of shade-trees, we find springs of most delightfully cool water
gushing out of crevices in the rocks, and, throwing our freely perspiring
forms beneath the grateful shade and letting the cold water play on our
wrists (the best method in the world of cooling one's self when overheated),
we both vote that it would be a most agreeable place to spend the heat
of the day.  but the morning is too young yet to think of thus indulging,
and the mountainous prospect ahead warns us that the distance covered
to-day will be short enough at the best.

the balkans are clothed with green foliage to the topmost crags, wild
pear-trees being no inconspicuous feature; charming little valleys wind
about between the mountain-spurs, and last night's downpour has imparted
a freshness to the whole scene that perhaps it would not be one's good
fortune to see every day, even were he here.  this region of intermingled
vales and forest-clad mountains might be the natural home of brigandage,
and those ferocious-looking specimens of humanity with things like long
guns in hand, running with scrambling haste down the mountain-side toward
our road ahead, look like veritable brigands heading us off with a view
to capturing us.  but they are peacefully disposed goatherds, who,
alpenstocks in hand, are endeavoring to see "what in the world those
queer-looking things are, coming up the road." their tuneful noise, as
they play on some kind of an instrument, greets our ears from a dozen
mountain-slopes round about us, as we put our shoulders to the wheel,
and gradually approach the summit.  tortoises are occasionally surprised
basking in the sunbeams in the middle of the road; when molested they
hiss quite audibly in protest, but if passed peacefully by they are seen
shuffling off into the bushes, as though thankful to escape.  unhappy
oxen are toiling patiently upward, literally inch by inch, dragging
heavy, creaking wagons, loaded with miscellaneous importations, prominent
among which i notice square cans of american petroleum.  men on horseback
are encountered, the long guns of the orient slung at their backs, and
knife and pistols in sash, looking altogether ferocious.  not only are
these people perfectly harmless, however, but i verily think it would
take a good deal of aggravation to make them even think of fighting.  the
fellow whose horse we frightened down a rocky embankment, at the imminent
risk of breaking the neck of both horse and rider, had both gun, knife,
and pistols; yet, though he probably thinks us emissaries of the evil
one, he is in no sense a dangerous character, his weapons being merely
gewgaws to adorn his person.  finally, the summit of this range is gained,
and the long, grateful descent into the valley of the nissava river
begins.  the surface during this descent, though averaging very good, is
not always of the smoothest; several dismounts are found to be necessary,
and many places ridden over require a quick hand and ready eye to pass.
the servians have made a capital point in fixing their new boundary-line
south of this mountain-range.

mountaineers are said to be "always freemen;" one can with equal
truthfulness add that the costumes of mountaineers' wives and daughters
are always more picturesque than those of their sisters in the valleys.
in these balkan mountains their costumes are a truly wonderful blending
of colors, to say nothing of fantastic patterns, apparently a medley of
ideas borrowed from occident and orient.  one woman we have just passed
is wearing the loose, flowing pantaloons of the orient, of a bright-yellow
color, a tight-fitting jacket of equally bright blue; around her waist
is folded many times a red and blue striped waistband, while both head
and feet are bare.  this is no holiday attire; it is plainly the ordinary
every-day costume.

at the foot of the range we halt at a way-side mehana for dinner.  a daily
diligence, with horses four abreast, runs over the balkans from niseh
to sophia, bulgaria, and one of them is halted at the mehana for
refreshments and a change of horses.  refreshments at these mehanas are
not always palatable to travellers, who almost invariably carry a supply
of provisions along.  of bread nothing but the coarse, black variety
common to the country is forthcoming at this mehana, and a gentleman,
learning from mr. popovitz that i have not yet been educated up to black
bread, fishes a large roll of excellent milch-brod out of his traps and
kindly presents it to us; and obtaining from the mehana some hune-hen
fabrica and wine we make a very good meal.  this hunehen fabrica is nothing
more nor less than cooked chicken.  whether hune-hen fabrica is genuine
hungarian for cooked chicken, or whether igali manufactured the term
especially for use between us, i cannot quite understand.  be this as it
may, before we started from belgrade, igali imparted the secret to mr.
popovitz that i was possessed with a sort of a wild appetite, as it were,
for hune-hen fabrica and cherries, three times a day, the consequence
being that mr. popovitz thoughtfully orders those viands whenever we
halt.  after dinner the mutterings of thunder over the mountains warn us
that unless we wish to experience the doubtful luxuries of a road-side
mehana for the night we had better make all speed to the village of bela
palanka, twelve kilometres distant over - rather hilly roads.  in forty
minutes we arrive at the bela palanka mehana, some time before the rain
begins.  it is but twenty kilometres to pirot, near the bulgarian frontier,
whither my companion has purposed to accompany me, but we are forced to
change this programme and remain at bela palanka.

it rains hard all night, converting the unassuming nissava into a roaring
yellow torrent, and the streets of the little balkan village into mud-
holes.  it is still raining on sunday morning, and as mr. popovitz is
obliged to be back to his duties as foreign correspondent in the servian
national bank at belgrade on tuesday, and the balkan roads have been
rendered impassable for a bicycle, he is compelled to hire a team and
wagon to haul him and his wheel back over the mountains to nisch, while
i have to remain over sunday amid the dirt and squalor and discomforts - to
say nothing of a second night among the fleas - of an oriental village
mehana.  we only made fifty kilometres over the mountains yesterday, but
during the three days from belgrade together the aggregate has been
satisfactory, and mr. popovitz has proven a most agreeable and interesting
companion.  when but fourteen years of age he served under the banner of
the red cross in the war between the turks and servians, and is altogether
an ardent patriot.  my sunday in bela palanka impresses me with the
conviction that an oriental village is a splendid place not to live in.
in dry weather it is disagreeable enough, but to-day, it is a disorderly
aggregation of miserable-looking villagers, pigs, ducks, geese, chickens,
and dogs, paddling around the muddy streets.  the oriental peasant's
costume is picturesque or otherwise, according to the fancy of the
observer.  the red fez or turban, the upper garment, and the ample red
sash wound round and round the waist until it is eighteen inches broad,
look picturesque enough for anybody; but when it comes to having the
seat of the pantaloons dangling about the calves of the legs, a person
imbued with western ideas naturally thinks that if the line between
picturesqueness and a two-bushel gunny-sack is to be drawn anywhere it
should most assuredly be drawn here.  as i notice how prevalent this
ungainly style of nether garment is in the orient, i find myself getting
quite uneasy lest, perchance, anything serious should happen to mine,
and i should be compelled to ride the bicycle in a pair of natives, which
would, however, be an altogether impossible feat unless it were feasible
to gather the surplus area up in a bunch and wear it like a bustle.  i
cannot think, however, that fate, cruel as she sometimes is, has anything
so outrageous as this in store for me or any other 'cycler.  although
turkish ladies have almost entirely disappeared from servia since its
severance from turkey, they have left, in a certain degree, an impress
upon the women of the country villages; although the bela palanka maidens,
as i notice on the streets in their sunday clothes to-day, do not wear
the regulation yashmak, but a head-gear that partially obscures the face,
their whole demeanor giving one the impression that their one object in
life is to appear the pink of propriety in the eyes of the whole world;
they walk along the streets at a most circumspect gait, looking neither
to the right nor left, neither stopping to converse with each other by
the way, nor paying any sort of attention to the men.  the two proprietors
of the mehana where i am stopping are subjects for a student of human
nature.  with their wretched little pigsty of a mehana in this poverty-stricken
village, they are gradually accumulating a fortune.  whenever a luckless
traveller falls into their clutches they make the incident count for
something.  they stand expectantly about in their box-like public room;
their whole stock consists of a little diluted wine and mastic, and if
a bit of black bread and smear-lease is ordered, one is putting it down
in the book, while the other is ferreting it out of a little cabinet
where they keep a starvation quantity of edibles; when the one acting
as waiter has placed the inexpensive morsel before you, he goes over to
the book to make sure that number two has put down enough; and, although
the maximum value of the provisions is perhaps not over twopence, this
precious pair will actually put their heads together in consultation
over the amount to be chalked down.  ere the shades of sunday evening
have settled down, i have arrived at the conclusion that if these two
are average specimens of the oriental jew they are financially a totally
depraved people.

the rain ceased soon after noon on sunday, and, although the roads are
all but impassable, i pull out southward at five o'clock on monday
morning, trundling up the mountain-roads through mud that frequently
compels me to stop and use the scraper.  after the summit of the hills
between bela palanka and pirot is gained, the road descending into the
valley beyond becomes better, enabling me to make quite good time into
pirot, where my passport.undergoes an examination, and is favored with
a vise by the servian officials preparatory to crossing the servian and
bulgarian frontier about twenty kilometres to the southward.  pirot is
quite a large and important village, and my appearance is the signal for
more excitement than the piroters have experienced for many a day.  while
i am partaking of bread and coffee in the hotel, the main street becomes
crowded as on some festive occasion, the grown-up people's faces beaming
with as much joyous anticipation of what they expect to behold when i
emerge from the hotel as the unwashed countenances of the ragged youngsters
around them.  leading citizens who have been to paris or vienna, and have
learned something about what sort of road a 'cycler needs, have imparted
the secret to many of their fellow-townsmen, and there is a general
stampede to the highway leading out of town to the southward.  this road
is found to be most excellent, and the enterprising people who have
walked, ridden, or driven out there, in order to see me ride past to the
best possible advantage, are rewarded by witnessing what they never saw
before - a cycler speeding along past them at ten miles an hour.  this gives
such general satisfaction that for some considerable distance i ride
between a double row of lifted hats and general salutations, and a
swelling murmur of applause runs all along the line.

two citizens, more enterprising even than the others, have determined
to follow me with team and light wagon to a road-side office ten kilometres
ahead, where passports have again to be examined.  the road for the whole
distance is level and fairly smooth; the servian horses are, like the
indian ponies of the west, small, but wiry and tough, and although i
press forward quite energetically, the whip is applied without stint,
and when the passport office is reached we pull up alongside it together,
but their ponies' sides are white with lather.  the passport officer is
so delighted at the story of the race, as narrated to him by the others,
that he fetches me out.a piece of lump sugar and a glass of water, a
common refreshment partaken of in this country.  yet a third time i am
halted by a roadside official and required to produce my passport, and
again at the village of zaribrod, just over the bulgarian frontier, which
i reach about ten o'clock.  to the bulgarian official i present a small
stamped card-board check, which was given me for that purpose at the
last servian examination, but he doesn't seem to understand it, and
demands to see the original passport.  when my english passport is produced
he examines it, and straightway assures me of the bulgarian official
respect for an englishman by grasping me warmly by the hand.  the passport
office is in the second story of a mud hovel, and is reached by a
dilapidated flight of out-door stairs.  my bicycle is left leaning against
the building, and during my brief interview with the officer a noisy
crowd of semi-civilized bulgarians have collected about, examining it
and commenting unreservedly concerning it and myself.  the officer, ashamed
of the rudeness of his country - and their evidently untutored minds,
leans out of the window, and in a chiding voice explains to the crowd
that i am a private individual, and not a travelling mountebank going
about the country giving exhibitions, and advises them to uphold the dignity
of the bulgarian character by scattering forthwith.  but the crowd doesn't
scatter to any appreciable extent; they don't care whether i am public or
private; they have never seen anything like me and the bicycle before,
and the one opportunity of a lifetime is not to be lightly passed over.
they are a wild, untamed lot, these bulgarians here at zaribrod, little
given to self-restraint.  when i emerge, the silence of eager anticipation
takes entire possession of the crowd, only to break forth into a spontaneous
howl of delight, from three hundred bared throats when i mount into the
saddle and ride away into - bulgaria.

my ride through servia, save over the balkans. has been most enjoyable,
and the roads, i am agreeably surprised to have to record, have averaged
as good as any country in europe, save england and france, though being
for the most part unmacadamized; with wet weather they would scarcely
show to such advantage.  my impression of the servian peasantry is most
favorable; they are evidently a warm-hearted, hospitable, and withal a
patriotic people, loving their little country and appreciating their
independence as only people who have but recently had their dream of
self-government realized know how to appreciate it; they even paint the
wood-work of their bridges and public buildings with the national colors.
i am assured that the servians have progressed wonderfully since acquiring
their full independence; but as one journeys down the beautiful and
fertile valley of the morava, where improvements would naturally be seen,
if anywhere, one falls to wondering where they can possibly have come
in.  some of their methods would, indeed, seem to indicate a most deplorable
lack of practicability; one of the most ridiculous, to the writer's mind,
is the erection of small, long sheds substantially built of heavy hewn
timber supports, and thick, home-made tiles, over ordinary plank fences
and gates to protect them from the weather, when a good coating of tar
or paint would answer the purpose of preservation much better.  these
structures give one the impression of a dollar placed over a penny to
protect the latter from harm.  every peasant owns a few acres of land,
and, if he produces anything above his own wants, he hauls it to market
in an ox-wagon with roughly hewn wheels without tires, and whose creaking
can plainly bo heard a mile away.  at present the servian tills his little
freehold with the clumsiest of implements, some his own rude handiwork,
and the best imperfectly fashioned and forged on native anvils.  his plow
is chiefly the forked limb of a tree, pointed with iron sufficiently to
enable him to root around in the surface soil.  one would think the country
might offer a promising field for some enterprising manufacturer of such
implements as hoes, scythes, hay-forks, small, strong plows, cultivators,
etc.

these people are industrious, especially the women.  i have entry met a
servian peasant woman returning homeward in the evening from her labor
in the fields, carrying a fat, heavy baby, a clumsy hoe not much lighter
than the youngster, and an earthenware water-pitcher, and, at the same
time, industriously spinning wool with a small hand-spindle.  and yet
some people argue about the impossibility of doing two things at once.
whether these poor women have been hoeing potatoes, carrying the infant,
and spinning wool at the same time all day i am unable to say, not having
been an eye-witness, though i really should not be much astonished if
they had.






chapter viii.




bulgaria, roumelia, and into turkey.

the road leading into bulgaria from the zaribrod custom-house is fairly
good for several kilometres, when mountainous and rough ways are
encountered; it is a country of goats and goat-herds.  a rain-storm is
hovering threateningly over the mountains immediately ahead, but it does
not reach the vicinity i am traversing: it passes to the southward, and
makes the roads for a number of miles wellnigh impassable.  up in the
mountains i meet more than one " bulgarian national express " - pony pack-
trains, carrying merchandise to and fro between sofia and nisch.  most
of these animals are too heavily laden to think of objecting to the
appearance of anything on the road, but some of the outfits are returning
from sofia in "ballast" only; and one of these, doubtless overjoyed
beyond measure at their unaccustomed lissomeness, breaks through all
restraint at my approach, and goes stampeding over the rolling hills,
the wild-looking teamsters in full tear after them.  whatever of this
nature happens in this part of the world the people seem to regard with
commendable complacence: instead of wasting time in trying to quarrel
about it, they set about gathering up the scattered train, as though a
stampede were the most natural thing going.  bulgaria - at least by the
route i am crossing it - is a land of mountains and elevated plateaus, and
the inhabitants i should call the "ranchers of the orient," in their
general appearance and demeanor bearing the same relation to the plodding
corn-hoer and scythe-swinger of the morava valley as the niobrara cow-boy
does to the nebraska homesteader.  on the mountains are encountered herds
of goats in charge of men who reck little for civilization, and the
upland plains are dotted over with herds of ponies that require constant
watching in the interest of scattered fields of grain.  for lunch i halt
at an unlikely-looking mehana, near a cluster of mud hovels, which, i
suppose, the bulgarians consider a village, and am rewarded by the
blackest of black bread, in the composition of which sand plays no
inconsiderable part, and the remnants of a chicken killed and stewed at
some uncertain period of the past.  of all places invented in the world
to disgust a hungry, expectant wayfarer, the bulgarian mehana is the
most abominable.  black bread and mastic (a composition of gum-mastic and
boston rum, so i am informed) seem to be about the only things habitually
kept in stock, and everything about the place plainly shows the proprietor
to be ignorant of the crudest notions of cleanliness.  a storm is observed
brewing in the mountains i have lately traversed, and, having swallowed
my unpalatable lunch, i hasten to mount, and betake myself off toward
sofia, distant thirty kilometres.  the road is nothing extra, to say the
least, but a howling wind blowing from the region of the gathering storm
propels me rapidly, in spite of undulations, ruts, and undesirable road
qualities generally.  the region is an elevated plateau, of which but a
small proportion is cultivated; on more than one of the neighboring peaks
patches of snow are still lingering, and the cool mountain breezes recall
memories of the laramie plains.  men and women returning homeward on
horseback from sofia are frequently encountered.  the women are decked
with beads and trinkets and the gewgaws of semi-civilization, as might
be the favorite squaws of squatting beaver or sitting bull, and furthermore
imitate their copper-colored sisters of the far west by bestriding their
ponies like men.  but in the matter of artistic and profuse decoration
of the person the squaw is far behind the peasant woman of bulgaria.  the
garments of the men are a combination of sheepskin and a thick, coarse,
woollen material, spun by the women, and fashioned after patterns their
forefathers brought with them centuries ago when they first invaded
europe.  the bulgarian saddle, like everything else here, is a rudely
constructed affair, that answers the double purpose of a pack-saddle or
for riding - a home-made, unwieldy thing, that is a fair pony's load of
itself.

at 4.30 p.m. i wheel into sofia, the bulgarian capital, having covered
one hundred and ten kilometres to-day, in spite of mud, mountains, and
roads that have been none of the best.  here again i have to patronize
the money-changers, for a few servian francs which i have are not current
in bulgaria; and the israelite, who reserved unto himself a profit of
two francs on the pound at nisch, now seems the spirit of fairness itself
along-side a hook-nosed, wizen-faced relative of his here at sofia, who
wants two servian francs in exchange for each bulgarian coin of the same
intrinsic value; and the best i am able to get by going to several
different money-changers is five francs in exchange for seven; yet the
servian frontier is but sixty kilometres distant, with stages running
to it daily; and the two coins are identical in intrinsic value.  at the
hotel concordia, in sofia, in lieu of plates, the meat is served on
round, flat blocks of wood about the circumference of a saucer - the
"trenchers" of the time of henry viii.- and two respectable citizens
seated opposite me are supping off black bread and a sliced cucumber,
both fishing slices of the cucumber out of a wooden bowl with their
fingers.

life at the bulgarian capital evidently bears its legitimate relative
comparison to the life of the country it represents.  one of prince
alexander's body-guard, pointed out to me in the bazaar, looks quite a
semi-barbarian, arrayed in a highly ornamented national costume, with
immense oriental pistols in waistband, and gold-braided turban cocked
on one side of his head, and a fierce mustache.  the soldiers here, even
the comparatively fortunate ones standing guard at the entrance to the
prince's palace, look as though they haven't had a new uniform for years
and had long since despaired of ever getting one.  a war, and an alliance
with some wealthy nation which would rig them out in respectable uniforms,
would probably not be an unwelcome event to many of them.  while wandering
about the bazaar, after supper, i observe that the streets, the palace
grounds, and in fact every place that is lit up at all, save the minarets
of the mosque, which are always illumined with vegetable oil, are lighted
with american petroleum, gas and coal being unknown in the bulgarian
capital.  there is an evident want of system in everything these people
do.  from my own observations i am inclined to think they pay no heed
whatever to generally accepted divisions of time, but govern their actions
entirely by light and darkness.  there is no eight-hour nor ten-hour
system of labor here; and i verily believe the industrial classes work
the whole time, save when they pause to munch black bread, and to take
three or four hours' sleep in the middle of the night; for as i trundle
my way through the streets at five o'clock next morning, the same people
i observed at various occupations in the bazaars are there now, as busily
engaged as though they had been keeping it up all night; as also are
workmen building a house; they were pegging away at nine o'clock yestefday
evening, by the flickering light of small petroleum lamps, and at five
this morning they scarcely look like men who are just commencing for the
day.  the oriental, with his primitive methods and tenacious adherence
to the ways of his forefathers, probably enough, has to work these extra
long hours in order to make any sort of progress.  however this may be,
i have throughout the orient been struck by the industriousness of the
real working classes; but in practicability and inventiveness the oriental
is sadly deficient.  on the way out i pause at the bazaar to drink hot
milk and eat a roll of white bread, the former being quite acceptable,
for the morning is rather raw and chilly; the wind is still blowing a
gale, and a company of cavalry, out for exercise, are incased in their
heavy gray overcoats, as though it were midwinter instead of the twenty-
third of june.  rudely clad peasants are encountered on the road, carrying
large cans of milk into sofia from neighboring ranches.  i stop several
of them with a view of sampling the quality of their milk, but invariably
find it unstrained, and the vessels looking as though they had been
strangers to scalding for some time.  others are carrying gunny-sacks of
smear-kase on their shoulders, the whey from which is not infrequently
streaming down their backs.  cleanliness is no doubt next to godliness;
but the bulgarians seem to be several degrees removed from either.  they
need the civilizing influence of soap quite as much as anything else,
and if the missionaries cannot educate them up to christianity or
civilization it might not be a bad scheme to try the experiment of
starting a native soap-factory or two in the country.

savagery lingers in the lap of civilization on the breezy plateaus of
bulgaria, but salvation is coming this way in the shape of an extension
of the eoumelian railway from the south, to connect with the servian
line north of the balkans.  for years the freight department of this
pioneer railway will have to run opposition against ox-teams, and creaking,
groaning wagons; and since railway stockholders and directors are not
usually content with an exclusive diet of black bread, with a wilted
cucumber for a change on sundays, as is the bulgarian teamster, and since
locomotives cannot be turned out to graze free of charge on the hill-sides,
the competition will not be so entirely one-sided as might be imagined.
long trains of these ox-teams are met with this morning hauling freight
and building-lumber from the railway terminus in eoumelia to sofia.  the
teamsters are wearing large gray coats of thick blanketing, with floods
covering the head, a heavy, convenient garment, that keeps out both rain
and cold while on the road, and at night serves for blanket and mattress;
for then the teamster turns his oxen loose on the adjacent hill-sides
to graze, and, after munching a piece of black bread, he places a small
wicker-work wind-break against the windward side of the wagon, and,
curling himself up in his great-coat, sleeps soundly.  besides the ox-
trains, large, straggling trains of pack-ponies and donkeys occasionally
fill the whole roadway; they are carrying firewood and charcoal from the
mountains, or wine and spirits, in long, slender casks, from roumelia;
while others are loaded with bales and boxes of miscellaneous merchandise,
out of all proportion to their own size.

the road southward from sofia is abominable, being originally constructed
of earth and large unbroken bowlders; it has not been repaired for years,
and the pack-trains and ox-wagons forever crawling along have, during
the wet weather of many seasons, tramped the dirt away, and left the
surface a wretched waste of ruts, holes, and thickly protruding stones.
it is the worst piece of road i have encountered in all europe; and
although it is ridable this morning by a cautious person, one risks and
invites disaster at every turn of the wheel.  "old boreas" comes howling
from the mountains of the north, and hustles me briskly along over ruts,
holes, and bowlders, however, in a most reckless fashion, furnishing all
the propelling power needful, and leaving me nothing to do but keep a
sharp lookout for breakneck places immediately ahead.  in servia, the
peasants, driving along the road in their wagons, upon observing me
approaching them, being uncertain of the character of my vehicle and the
amount of road-space i require, would ofttimes drive entirely off the
road; and sometimes, when they failed to take this precaution, and their
teams would begin to show signs of restiveness as i drew near, the men
would seem to lose their wits for the moment, and cry out in alarm, as
though some unknown danger were hovering over them.  i have seen women
begin to wail quite pitifully, as though they fancied i bestrode an all-
devouring circular saw that was about to whirl into them and rend team,
wagon, and everything asunder.  but the bulgarians don't seem to care
much whether i am going to saw them in twain or not; they are far less
particular about yielding the road, and both men and women seem to be
made of altogether sterner stuff than the servians and slavonians.  they
seem several degrees less civilized than their neighbors farther north,
judging from tieir general appearance and demeanor.  they act peaceably
and are reasonably civil toward me and the bicycle, however, and personallv
i rather enjoy their rough, unpolished manners.  although there is a
certain element of rudeness and boisterousuess about them compared with
anything i have encountered elsewhere in europe, they seem, on the whole,
a good-natured people.  we westerners seldom hear anything of the bulgarians
except in war-times and then it is usually in connection with atrocities
that furnish excellent sensational material for the illustrated weeklies;
consequently i rather expected to have a rough time riding through alone.
but, instead of coming out slashed and scarred like a heidelberg student,
i emerge from their territory with nothing more serious than a good
healthy shaking up from their ill-conditioned roads and howling winds,
and my prejudice against black bread with sand in it partly overcome
from having had to eat it or nothing. bulgaria is a principality under
the suzerainty of the sultan, to whom it is supposed to pay a yearly
tribute; but the suzerainty sits lightly upon the people, since they do
pretty much as they please; and they never worry themselves about the
tribute, simply putting it down on the slate whenever it comes due.  the
turks might just as well wipe out the account now as at any time, for
they will eventually have to whistle for the whole indebtedness.  a smart
rain-storm drives me into an uninviting mehana near the roumelian frontier,
for two unhappy hours, at noon - a mehana where the edible accommodations
would wring an "ugh" from an american indian - and the sole occupants
are a blear-eyed bulgarian, in twenty-year-old sheep-skin clothes, whose
appearance plainly indicates an over-fondness for mastic, and an unhappy-
looking black kitten.  fearful lest something, perchance, might occur
to compel me to spend the night here, i don my gossamers as soon as the
rain slacks up a little, and splurge ahead through the mud toward ichtiman,
which, my map informs me, is just on this side of the kodja balkans,
which rise up in dark wooded ridges at no great distance ahead, to the
southward.  the mud and rain combine to make things as disagreeable as
possible, but before three o'clock i reach ichtiman, to find that i am
in the province of eoumelia, and am again required to produce my passport.

i am now getting well down into territory that quite recently was
completely under the dominion of the "unspeakable turk " - unspeakable,
by the way, to the writer in more senses than one - and is partly so even
now, but have as yet seen very little of the "mysterious veiled lady."
the bulgarians are christian when they are anything, though the great
majority of them are nothing religiously.  a comparatively comfortable
mehana is found here at ichtiman, and the proprietor, being able to talk
german, readily comprehends the meaning of hune-hen fabrica; but i have
to dispense with cherries.

mud is the principal element of the road leading out of ichtiman and
over the kodja balkans this morning.  the curious crowd of ichtimanites
that follow me through the mud-holes and filth of their native streets,
to see what is going to happen when i get clear of them, are rewarded
but poorly for their trouble; the best i can possibly do being to make
a spasmodic run of a hundred yards through the mud, which i do purely
out of consideration for their inquisitiveness, since it seems rather
disagreeable to disappoint a crowd of villagers who are expectantly
following and watching one's every movement, wondering, in their ignorance,
why you don't ride instead of walk.  it is a long, wearisome trundle up
the muddy slopes of the kodja balkans, but, after the descent into the
maritza valley begins, some little ridable surface is encountered, though
many loose stones are lying about, and pitch-holes innumerable, make
riding somewhat risky, considering that the road frequently leads
immediately alongside precipices.  pack-donkeys are met on these mountain-
roads, sometimes filling the way, and corning doggedly and indifferently
forward, even in places where i have little choice between scrambling
up a rock on one side of the road or jumping down a precipice on the
other.  i can generally manage to pass them, however, by placing the
bicycle on one side, and, 'standing guard over it, push them off one by
one as they pass.  some of these roumelian donkeys are the most diminutive
creatures i ever saw; but they seem capable of toiling up these steep
mountain-roads with enormous loads.  i met one this morning carrying
bales of something far bigger than himself, and a big roumelian, whose
feet actually came in contact with the ground occasionally, perched on
his rump; the man looked quite capable of carrying both the donkey and
his load.

the warm and fertile maritza valley is reached soon after noon, and i
am not sorry to find it traversed by a decent macadamized road; though,
while it has been raining quite heavily up among the mountains, this
valley has evidently been favored with a small deluge, and frequent
stretches are covered with deep mud and sand, washed down from the
adjacent hills; in the cultivated areas of the bulgarian uplands the
grain-fields are yet quite green, but harvesting has already begun in
the warmer maritza vale, and gangs of roumelian peasants are in the
fields, industriously plying reaping-hooks to save their crops of wheat
and rye, which the storm has badly lodged.  ere many miles of this level
valley-road are ridden over, a dozen pointed minarets loom up ahead, and
at four o'clock i dismount at the confines of the well nigh impassable
streets of tatar bazardjik, quite a lively little city in the sense that
oriental cities are lively, which means well-stocked bazaars thronged
with motley crowds.  here i am delayed for some time by a thunder-storm,
and finally wheel away southward in the face of threatening heavens.
several villages of gypsies are camped on the banks of the maritza, just
outside the limits of tatar bazardjik; a crowd of bronzed, half-naked
youngsters wantonly favor me with a fusillade of stones as i ride past,
and several gaunt, hungry-looking curs follow me for some distance with
much threatening clamor.  the dogs in the orient seem to be pretty much
all of one breed, genuine mongrel, possessing nothing of the spirit and
courage of the animals we are familiar with.  gypsies are more plentiful
south of the save than even in austria-hungary, but since leaving slavonia
i have never been importuned by them for alms.  travellers from other
countries are seldom met with along the roads here, and i suppose that
the wandering romanies have long since learned the uselessness of asking
alms of the natives; but, since they religiously abstain from anything
like work, how they manage to live is something of a mystery.

ere i am five kilometres from tatar bazardjik the rain begins to descend,
and there is neither house nor other shelter visible anywhere ahead.  the
peasants' villages are all on the river, and the road leads for mile
after mile through fields of wheat and rye.  i forge ahead in a drenching
downpour that makes short work of the thin gossamer suit, which on this
occasion barely prevents me getting a wet skin ere i descry a thrice-welcome
mehana ahead and repair thither, prepared to accept, with becoming
thankfulness, whatever accommodation the place affords.  it proves many
degrees superior to the average bulgarian institution of the same name,
the proprietor causing my eyes fairly to bulge out with astonishment by
producing a box of french sardines, and bread several shades lighter
than i had, in view of previous experience expected to find it; and for
a bed provides one of the huge, thick overcoats before spoken of, which,
with the ample hood, envelops the whole figure in a covering that defies
both wet and cold.  i am provided with this unsightly but none the less
acceptable garment, and given the happy privilege of occupying the floor
of a small out-building in company with several rough-looking pack-train
teamsters similarly incased; i pass a not altogether comfortless night,
the pattering of rain against the one small window effectually suppressing
such thankless thoughts as have a tendency to come unbidden whenever the
snoring of any of my fellow-lodgers gets aggravatingly harsh.  in all
this company i think i am the only person who doesn't snore, and when i
awake from my rather fitful slumbers at four o'clock and find the rain
no longer pattering against the window, i arise, and take up my journey
toward philippopolis, the city i had intended reaching yesterday.  it is
after crossing the kodja balkans and descending into the maritza valley
that one finds among the people a peculiarity that, until a person becomes
used to it, causes no little mystification and many ludicrous mistakes.
a shake of the head, which with us means a negative answer, means exactly
the reverse with the people of the maritza valley; and it puzzled me not
a little more than once yesterday afternoon when inquiring whether i was
on the right road, and when patronizing fruit-stalls in tatar bazardjik.
one never feels quite certain about being right when, after inquiring
of a native if this is the correct road to mustapha pasha or philippopolis
he replies with a vigorous shake of the head; and although one soon gets
accustomed to this peculiarity in others, and accepts it as it is intended,
it is not quite so easy to get into the habit yourself.  this queer custom
seems to prevail only among the inhabitants of this particular valley,
for after leaving it at adrianople i see nothing more of it.  another
peculiarity all through oriental, and indeed through a good part of
central europe, is that, instead of the "whoa" which we use to a horse,
the driver hisses like a goose.

yesterday evening's downpour has little injured the road between the
mehana and philippopolis, the capital of eoumelia, and i wheel to the
confines of that city in something over two hours.  philippopolis is most
beautifully situated, being built on and around a cluster of several
rocky hills; a situation which, together with a plenitude of waving
trees, imparts a pleasing and picturesque effect.  with a score of tapering
minarets pointing skyward among the green foliage, the scene is thoroughly
oriental; but, like all eastern cities, "distance lends enchantment to
the view." all down the maritza valley, and in lesser numbers extending
southward and eastward over the undulating plains of adrianople, are
many prehistoric mounds, some twenty-five or thirty feet high, and of
about the same diameter.  sometimes in groups, and sometimes singly, these
mounds occur so frequently that one can often count a dozen at a time.
in the vicinity of philippopolis several have been excavated, and human
remains discovered reclining beneath large slabs of coarse pottery set
up like an inverted v, thus: a, evidently intended as a water-shed for
the preservation of the bodies.  another feature of the landscape, and
one that fails not to strike the observant traveller as a melancholy
feature, are the mohammedan cemeteries.  outside every town and near every
village are broad areas of ground thickly studded with slabs of roughly
hewn rock set up on end; cities of the dead vastly more populous than
the abodes of life adjacent.  a person can stand on one of the philippopolis
heights and behold the hills and vales all around thickly dotted with
these rude reminders of our universal fate.  it is but as yesterday since
the turk occupied these lands, and was in the habit of making it
particularly interesting to any "dog of a christian" who dared desecrate
one of these mussulman cemeteries with his unholy presence; but to-day
they are unsurrounded by protecting fence or the moral restrictions of
dominant mussulmans, and the sheep, cows, and goats of the "infidel
giaour" graze among them; and oh, shade of mohammed! hogs also scratch
their backs against the tombstones and root around, at their own sweet
will, sometimes unearthing skulls and bones, which it is the turkish
custom not to bury at any great depth.  the great number and extent of
these cemeteries seem to appeal to the unaccustomed observer in eloquent
evidence against a people whose rule find religion have been of the
sword.

while obtaining my breakfast of bread and milk in the philippopolis
bazaar an arab ragamuffin rushes in, and, with anxious gesticulations
toward the bicycle, which i have from necessity left outside, and cries
of "monsieur, monsieur," plainly announces that there is something going
wrong in connection with the machine.  quickly going out i find that,
although i left it standing on the narrow apology for a sidewalk, it is
in imminent danger of coming to grief at the instance of a broadly laden
donkey, which, with his load, veritably takes up the whole narrow street,
including the sidewalks, as he slowly picks his way along through mud-holes
and protruding cobble-stones.  and yet philippopolis has improved wonderfully
since it has nominally changed from a turkish to a christian city, i am
told; the cross having in philippopolis not only triumphed over the
crescent, but its influence is rapidly changing the condition and
appearance of the streets.  there is no doubt about the improvements, but
they are at present most conspicuous in the suburbs, near the english
consulate.  it is threatening rain again as i am picking my way through
the crooked streets of philippopolis toward the adrianople road; verily,
i seem these days to be fully occupied in playing hide-and-seek with the
elements; but in roumelia at this season it is a question of either rain
or insufferable heat, and perhaps, after all, i have reason to be thankful
at having the former to contend with rather than the latter.  two
thunderstorms have to be endured during the forenoon, and for lunch i
reach a mehana where, besides eggs roasted in the embers, and fairly
good bread, i am actually offered a napkin that has been used but a few
times - an evidence of civilization that is quite refreshing.  a repetition
of the rain-dodging of the forenoon characterizes the afternoon journey,
and while halting at a small village the inhabitants actually take me
for a mountebank, and among them collect a handful of diminutive copper
coins about the size and thickness of a gold twenty-five-cent piece, and
of which it would take at least twenty to make an american cent, and
offer them to me for a performance.  what with shaking my head for "no"
and the villagers naturally mistaking the motion for " yes," according
to their own custom, i have quite an interesting time of it making them
understand that i am not a mountebank travelling from one roumelian
village to another, living on two cents' worth of black sandy bread per
diem, and giving performances for about three cents a time.  for my
halting-place to-night i reach the village of cauheme, in which i find
a mehana, where, although the accommodations are of the crudest nature,
the proprietor is a kindly disposed and, withal, a thoroughly honest
individual, furnishing me with a reed mat and a pillow, and making things
as comfortable and agreeable as possible.  eating raw cucumbers as we eat
apples or pears appears to be universal in oriental europe; frequently,
through bulgaria and roumelia, i have noticed people, both old and young,
gnawing away at a cucumber with the greatest relish, eating it rind and
all, without any condiments whatever.

all through roumelia the gradual decay of the crescent and the corresponding
elevation of the cross is everywhere evident; the christian element is
now predominant, and the turkish authorities play but an unimportant
part in the government of internal affairs.  naturally enough, it does
not suit the mussulman to live among people whom his religion and time-
honored custom have taught him to regard as inferiors, the consequence
being that there has of late years been a general folding of tents and
silently stealing away; and to-day it is no very infrequent occurrence
for a whole mussulman village to pack up, bag and baggage, and move
bodily to asia minor, where the sultan gives them tracts of land for
settlement.  between the christian and mussulman populations of these
countries there is naturally a certain amount of the "six of one and
half a dozen of the other " principle, and in certain regions, where the
mussulmans have dwindled to a small minority, the christians are ever
prone to bestow upon them the same treatment that the turks formerly
gave them.  there appears to be little conception of what we consider
"good manners" among oriental villagers, and while i am writing out a
few notes this evening, the people crowding the mehana because of my
strange unaccustomed presence stand around watching every motion of my
pen, jostling carelessly against the bench, and commenting on things
concerning me and the bicycle with a garrulousness that makes it almost
impossible for me to write.  the women of these eoumelian villages bang
their hair, and wear it in two long braids, or plaited into a streaming
white head-dress of some gauzy material, behind; huge silver clasps,
artistically engraved, that are probably heirlooms, fasten a belt around
their waists; and as they walk along barefooted, strings of beads,
bangles, and necklaces of silver coins make an incessant jingling.  the
sky clears and the moon shines forth resplendently ere i stretch myself
on my rude couch to-night, and the sun rising bright next morning would
seem to indicate fair weather at last; an indication that proves illusory,
however, before the day is over.

at khaskhor, some fifteen kilometres from cauheme, i am able to obtain
my favorite breakfast of bread, milk, and fruit, and while i am in-doors
eating it a stalwart turk considerately mounts guard over the bicycle,
resolutely keeping the meddlesome crowd at bay until i get through eating.
the roads this morning, though hilly, are fairly smooth, and about eleven
o'clock i reach hermouli, the last town in roumelia, where, besides being
required to produce my passport, i am requested by a pompous lieutenant
of gendarmerie to produce my permit for carrying a revolver, the first
time i have been thus molested in europe.  upon explaining, as best i
can, that i have no such permit, and that for a voyageur permission is
not necessary (something about which i am in no way so certain, however,
as my words would seem to indicate), i am politely disarmed, and conducted
to a guard-room in the police-barracks, and for some twenty minutes am
favored with the exclusive society of a uniformed guard and the unhappy
reflections of a probable heavy fine, if not imprisonment.  i am inclined
to think afterward that in arresting and detaining me the officer was
simply showing off his authority a little to his fellow-hermoulites,
clustered about me and the bicycle, for, at the expiration of half an
hour, my revolver and passport are handed back to me, and without further
inquiries or explanations i am allowed to depart in peace.  as though in
wilful aggravation of the case, a village of gypsies have their tents
pitched and their donkeys grazing in the last mohammedan cemetery i see
ere passing over the roumelian border into turkey proper, where, at the
very first village, the general aspect of religious affairs changes, as
though its proximity to the border should render rigid distinctions
desirable.  instead of the crumbling walls and tottering minarets, a group
of closely veiled women are observed praying outside a well-preserved
mosque, and praying sincerely too, since not even my ncver-before-seen
presence and the attention-commanding bicycle are sufficient to win their
attention for a moment from their devotions, albeit those i meet on the
road peer curiously enough from between the folds of their muslin yashmaks.
i am worrying along to-day in the face of a most discouraging head-wind,
and the roads, though mostly ridable, are none of the best.  for much of
the way there is a macadamized road that, in the palmy days of the ottoman
dominion, was doubtless a splendid highway, but now weeds and thistles,
evidences of decaying traffic and of the proximity of the eoumelian
railway, are growing in the centre, and holes and impassable places make
cycling a necessarily wide-awake performance.

mustapha pasha is the first turkish town of any importance i come to,
and here again my much-required "passaporte" has to be exhibited; but
the police-officers of mustapha pasha seem to be exceptionally intelligent
and quite agreeable fellows.  my revolver is in plain view, in its
accustomed place; but they pay no sort of attention to it, neither do
they ask me a whole rigmarole of questions about my linguistic
accomplishments, whither i am going, whence i came, etc., but simply
glance at my passport, as though its examination were a matter of small
consequence anyhow, shake hands, and smilingly request me to let them
see me ride.  it begins to rain soon after i leave mustapha pasha, forcing
me to take refuge in a convenient culvert beneath the road.  i have been
under this shelter but a few minutes when i am favored with the company
of three swarthy turks, who, riding toward mustapha pasha on horseback,
have sought the same shelter.  these people straightway express their
astonishment at finding rne and the bicycle under the culvert, by first
commenting among themselves; then they turn a battery of turkish
interrogations upon my devoted head, nearly driving me out of my senses
ere i escape.  they are, of course, quite unintelligible to me; for if
one of them asks a question a shrug of the shoulders only causes him to
repeat the same over and over again, each time a little louder and a
little more deliberate.  sometimes they are all three propounding questions
and emphasizing them at the same time, until i begin to think that there
is a plot to talk me to death and confiscate whatever valuables i have
about me.  they all three have long knives in their waistbands, and,
instead of pointing out the mechanism of the bicycle to each other with
the finger, like civilized people, they use these long, wicked-looking
knives for the purpose.  they maybe a coterie of heavy villains for
anything i know to the contrary, or am able to judge from their general
appearance, and in view of the apparent disadvantage of one against three
in such cramped quarters, i avoid their immediate society as much as
possible by edging off to one end of the culvert.  they are probably
honest enough, but as their stock of interrogations seems inexhaustible,
at the end of half an hour i conclude to face the elements and take my
chances of finding some other shelter farther ahead rather than endure
their vociferous onslaughts any longer.  they all three come out to see
what is going to happen, and i am not ashamed to admit that i stand
tinkering around the bicycle in the pelting rain longer than is necessary
before mounting, in order to keep them out in it and get them wet through,
if possible, in revenge for having practically ousted me from the culvert,
and since i have a water-proof, and they have nothing of the sort, i
partially succeed in my plans.

the road is the same ancient and neglected macadam, but between mustapha
pasha and adrianople they either make some pretence of keeping it in
repair, or else the traffic is sufficient to keep down the weeds, and i
am able to mount and ride in spite of the downpour.  after riding about
two miles i come to another culvert, in which i deem it advisable to
take shelter.  here, also, i find myself honored with company, but this
time it is a lone cow-herder, who is either too dull and stupid to do
anything but stare alternately at me and the bicycle, or else is deaf
and dumb, and my recent experience makes me cautious about tempting him
to use his tongue.  i am forced by the rain to remain cramped up in this
last narrow culvert until nearly dark, and then trundle along through
an area of stones and water-holes toward adrianople, which city lies i
know not how far to the southeast.  while trundling along through the
darkness, in the hope of reaching a village or mehana, i observe a rocket
shoot skyward in the distance ahead, and surmise that it indicates the
whereabout of adrianople; but it is plainly many a weary mile ahead; the
road cannot be ridden by the uncertain light of a cloud-veiled moon, and
i have been forging ahead, over rough ways leading through an undulating
country, and most of the day against a strong head-wind, since early
dawn.  by ten o'clock i happily arrive at a section of country that has
not been favored by the afternoon rain, and, no mehana making its
appearance, i conclude to sup off the cold, cheerless memories of the
black bread and half-ripe pears eaten for dinner at a small village, and
crawl beneath some wild prune-bushes for the night.

a few miles wheeling over very fair roads, next morning, brings me into
adrianople, where, at the hotel constantinople, i obtain an excellent
breakfast of roast lamb, this being the only well-cooked piece of meat
i have eaten since leaving nisch.  it has rained every day without
exception since it delayed me over sunday at bela palanka, and this
morning it begins while i am eating breakfast, and continues a drenching
downpour for over an hour.  while waiting to see what the weather is
coming to, i wander around the crooked and mystifying streets, watching
the animated scenes about the bazaars, and try my best to pick up some
knowledge of the value of the different coins, for i have had to deal
with a bewildering mixture of late, and once again there is a complete
change.  medjidis, cheriks, piastres, and paras now take the place of
serb francs, bulgar francs, and a bewildering list of nickel and copper
pieces, down to one that i should think would scarcely purchase a wooden
toothpick.  the first named is a large silver coin worth four and a half
francs; the cherik might be called a quarter dollar; while piastres and
paras are tokens, the former about five cents and the latter requiring
about nine to make one cent.  there are no copper coins in turkey proper,
the smaller coins being what is called "metallic money," a composition
of copper and silver, varying in value from a five-para piece to five
piastres.

the adrianopolitans, drawn to the hotel by the magnetism of the bicycle,
are bound to see me ride whether or no, and in their quite natural
ignorance of its character, they request me to perform in the small,
roughly-paved court-yard of the hotel, and all sorts of impossible places.
i shake my head in disapproval and explanation of the impracticability
of granting their request, but unfortunately adrianople is within the
circle where a shake of the head is understood to mean " yes, certainly;"
and the happy crowd range around a ridiculously small space, and smiling
approvingly at what they consider my willingness to oblige, motion for
me to come ahead.  an explanation seems really out of the question after
this, and i conclude that the quickest and simplest way of satisfying
everybody is to demonstrate my willingness by mounting and wabbling
along, if only for a few paces, which i accordingly do beneath a hack
shed, at the imminent risk of knocking my brains out against beams and
rafters.

at eleven o'clock i decide to make a start, i and the bicycle being the
focus of attraction for a most undignified mob as i trundle through the
muddy streets toward the suburbs.  arriving at a street where it is
possible to mount and ride for a short distance, i do this in the hope
of satisfying the curiosity of the crowd, and being permitted to leave
the city in comparative peace and privacy; but the hope proves a vain
one, for only the respectable portion of the crowd disperses, leaving
me, solitary and alone, among a howling mob of the rag, tag, and bobtail
of adrianople, who follow noisily along, vociferously yelling for me to
"bin! bin!" (mount, mount), and "chu! chu!" (ride, ride) along the
really unridable streets.  this is the worst crowd i have encountered on
the entire journey across two continents, and, arriving at a street where
the prospect ahead looks comparatively promising, i mount, and wheel
forward with a view of outdistancing them if possible; but a ride of
over a hundred yards without dismounting would be an exceptional performance
in adrianople after a rain, and i soon find that i have made a mistake
in attempting it, for, as i mount, the mob grows fairly wild and riotous
with excitement, flinging their red fezes at the wheels, rushing up
behind and giving the bicycle smart pushes forward, in their eagerness
to see it go faster, and more than one stone comes bounding along the
street, wantonly flung by some young savage unable to contain himself.
i quickly decide upon allaying the excitement by dismounting, and trundling
until the mobs gets tired of following, whatever the distance.  this
movement scarcely meets with the approval of the unruly crowd, however,
and several come forward and exhibit ten-para pieces as an inducement
for me to ride again, while overgrown gamins swarm around me, and,
straddling the middle and index fingers of their right hands over their
left, to illustrate and emphasize their meaning, they clamorously cry,
"bin! bin! chu! chu! monsieur! chu! chu!" as well as much other persuasive
talk, which, if one could understand, would probably be found to mean
in substance, that, although it is the time-honored custom and privilege
of adrianople mobs to fling stones and similar compliments at such
unbelievers from the outer world as come among them in a conspicuous
manner, they will considerately forego their privileges this time, if i
will only "bin! bin!" and "chu! chu!" the aspect of harmless
mischievousness that would characterize a crowd of occidental youths on
a similar occasion is entirely wanting here, their faces wearing the
determined expression of people in dead earnest about grasping the only
opportunity of a lifetime.  respectable turks stand on the sidewalk and
eye the bicycle curiously, but they regard my evident annoyance at being
followed by a mob like this with supreme indifference, as does also a
passing gendarme, whom i halt, and motion my disapproval of the proceedings.
like the civilians, he pays no sort of attention, but fixes a curious
stare on the bicycle, and asks something, the import of which will to
me forever remain a mystery.

once well out of the city the road is quite good for several kilometres,
and i am favored with a unanimous outburst of approval from a rough crowd
at a suburban mehana, because of outdistancing a horseman who rides out
from among them to overtake me.  at adrianople my road leaves the maritza
valley and leads across the undulating uplands of the adrianople plains,
hilly, and for most of the way of inferior surface.  reaching the village
of hafsa, soon after noon, i am fairly taken possession of by a crowd
of turbaned and fezed hafsaites and soldiers wearing the coarse blue
uniform of the turkish regulars, and given not one moment's escape from
"bin! bin!" until i consent to parade my modest capabilities with the
wheel by going back and forth along a ridable section of the main street.
the population is delighted.  solid old turks pat me on the back approvingly,
and the proprietor of the mehana fairly hauls me and the bicycle into
his establishment.  this person is quite befuddled with mastic, which
makes him inclined to be tyrannical and officious; and several times
within the hour, while i wait for the never-failing thunder-shower to
subside, he peremptorily dismisses both civilians and military out of
the mehana yard; but the crowd always filters back again in less than
two minutes.  once, while eating dinner, i look out of the window and
find the bicycle has disappeared.  hurrying out, i meet the boozy proprietor
and another individual making their way with alarming unsteadiness up a
steep stairway, carrying the machine between them to an up-stairs room,
where the people will have no possible chance of seeing it.  two minutes
afterward his same whimsical and capricious disposition impels him to
politely remove the eatables from before me, and with the manners of a
showman, he gently leads me away from the table, and requests me to ride
again for the benefit of the very crowd he had, but two minutes since,
arbitrarily denied the privilege of even looking at the bicycle.  nothing
would be more natural than to refuse to ride under these circumstances;
but the crowd looks so gratified at the proprietor's sudden and unaccountable
change of front, that i deem it advisable, in the interest of being
permitted to finish my meal in peace, to take another short spin; moreover,
it is always best to swallow such little annoyances in good part.

my route to-day is a continuation of the abandoned macadam road, the
weed-covered stones of which i have frequently found acceptable in tiding
me over places where the ordinary dirt road was deep with mud.  in spite
of its long-neglected condition, occasional ridable stretches are
encountered, but every bridge and culvert has been destroyed, and an
honest shepherd, not far from hafsa, who from a neighboring knoll observes
me wheeling down a long declivity toward one of these uncovered waterways,
nearly shouts himself hoarse, and gesticulates most frantically in an
effort to attract my attention to the danger ahead.  soon after this i
am the innocent cause of two small pack-mules, heavily laden with
merchandise, attempting to bolt from their driver, who is walking behind.
one of them actually succeeds in escaping, and, although his pack is too
heavy to admit of running at any speed, he goes awkwardly jogging across
the rolling plains, as though uncertain in his own mind of whether he
is acting sensibly or not; but his companion in pack-slavery is less
fortunate, since he tumbles into a gully, bringing up flat on his broad
and top-heavy pack with his legs frantically pawing the air.  stopping
to assist the driver in getting the collapsed mule on his feet again,
this individual demands damages for the accident; so i judge, at least,
from the frequency of the word "medjedie," as he angrily, yet ruefully,
points to the mud-begrimed pack and unhappy, yet withal laughter-provoking,
attitude of the mule; but i utterly fail to see any reasonable connection
between the uncalled-for scariness of his mules and the contents of my
pocket-book, especially since i was riding along the sultan's ancient
and deserted macadam, while he and his mules were patronizing a separate
and distinct dirt-road alongside.  as he seems far more concerned about
obtaining a money satisfaction from me than the rescue of the mule from
his topsy-turvy position, i feel perfectly justified, after several times
indicating my willingness to assist him, in leaving him and proceeding
on my way.

the adrianople plains are a dreary expanse of undulating grazing-land,
traversed by small sloughs and their adjacent cultivated areas.  along
this route it is without trees, and the villages one comes to at intervals
of eight or ten miles are shapeless clusters of mud, straw-thatched huts,
out of the midst of which, perchance, rises the tapering minaret of a
small mosque, this minaret being, of course, the first indication of a
village in the distance.  between adrianople and eski baba, the town i
reach for the night, are three villages, in one of which i approach a
turkish private house for a drink of water, and surprise the women with
faces unveiled.  upon seeing my countenance peering in the doorway they
one and all give utterance to little screams of dismay, and dart like
frightened fawns into an adjoining room.  when the men appear, to see
what is up, they show no signs of resentment at my abrupt intrusion, but
one of them follows the women into the room, and loud, angry words seem
to indicate that they are being soundly berated for allowing themselves
to be thus caught.  this does not prevent the women from reappearing the
next minute, however, with their faces veiled behind the orthodox yashmak,
and through its one permissible opening satisfying their feminine curiosity
by critically surveying me and my strange vehicle.  four men follow me
on horseback out of this village, presumably to see what use i make of
the machine; at least i cannot otherwise account for the honor of their
unpleasantly close attentions - close, inasmuch as they keep their horses'
noses almost against my back, in spite of sundry subterfuges to shake
them off.  when i stop they do likewise, and when i start again they
deliberately follow, altogether too near to be comfortable.  they are,
all four, rough-looking peasants, and their object is quite unaccountable,
unless they are doing it for "pure cussedness," or perhaps with some
vague idea of provoking me into doing something that would offer them
the excuse of attacking and robbing me.  the road is sufficiently lonely
to invite some such attention.  if they are only following me to see what
i do with the bicycle, they return but little enlightened, since they
see nothing but trundling and an occasional scraping off of mud.  at the
end of about two miles, whatever their object, they give it up.  several
showers occur during the afternoon, and the distance travelled has been
short and unsatisfactory, when just before dark i arrive at eski baba,
where i am agreeably surprised to find a mehana, the proprietor of which
is a reasonably mannered individual.  since getting into turkey proper,
reasonably mannered people have seemed wonderfully scarce, the majority
seeming to be most boisterous and headstrong.  next to the bicycle the
turks of these interior villages seem to exercise their minds the most
concerning whether i have a passport; as i enter eski baba; a gendarme
standing at the police-barrack gates shouts after me to halt and produce
"passaporte." exhibiting my passport at almost every village is getting
monotonous, and, as i am going to remain here at least overnight, i
ignore the gendarme's challenge and wheel on to the mehana.  two gendarmes
are soon on the spot, inquiring if i have a "passaporte;" but, upon
learning that i am going no farther to-day, they do not take the trouble
to examine it, the average turkish official religiously believing in
never doing anything to-day that can be put off till to-morrow.

the natives of a turkish interior village are not over-intimate with
newspapers, and are in consequence profoundly ignorant, having little
conception of anything, save what they have been familiar with and
surrounded by all their lives, and the appearance of the bicycle is
indeed a strange visitation, something entirely beyond their comprehension.
the mehana is crowded by a wildly gesticulating and loudly commenting
and arguing crowd of turks and christians all the evening.  although there
seems to be quite a large proportion of native unbelievers in eski baba
there is not a single female visible on the streets this evening; and
from observations next day i judge it to be a conservative mussulman
village, where the turkish women, besides keeping themselves veiled with
orthodox strictness, seldom go abroad, and the women who are not mohammedan,
imbibing something of the retiring spirit of the dominant race, also
keep themselves well in the background.  a round score of dogs, great and
small, and in all possible conditions of miserableness, congregate in
the main street of eski baba at eventide, waiting with hungry-eyed
expectancy for any morsel of food or offal that may peradventure find
its way within their reach.  the turks, to their credit be it said, never
abuse dogs; but every male "christian" in eski baba seems to consider
himself in duty bound to kick or throw a stone at one, and scarcely a
minute passes during the whole evening without the yelp of some unfortunate
cur.  these people seem to enjoy a dog's sufferings; and one soulless
peasant, who in the course of the evening kicks a half-starved cur so
savagely that the poor animal goes into a fit, and, after staggering and
rolling all over the street, falls down as though really dead, is the
hero of admiring comments from the crowd, who watch the creature's
sufferings with delight.  seeing who can get the most telling kicks at
the dogs seems to be the regular evening's pastime among the male
population of eski baba unbelievers, and everybody seems interested and
delighted when some unfortunate animal comes in for an unusually severe
visitation.  a rush mat on the floor of the stable is my bed to-night,
with a dozen unlikely looking natives, to avoid the close companionship
of whom i take up my position in dangerous proximity to a donkey's hind
legs, and not six feet from where the same animal's progeny is stretched
out with all the abandon of extreme youth.  precious little sleep is
obtained, for fleas innumerable take liberties with my person.  a flourishing
colony of swallows inhabiting the roof keeps up an incessant twittering,
and toward daylight two muezzins, one on the minaret of each of the two
mosques near by, begin calling the faithful to prayer, and howling "allah.
allah!" with the voices of men bent on conscientiously doing their
duty by making themselves heard by every mussulman for at least a mile
around, robbing me of even the short hour of repose that usually follows
a sleepless night.

it is raining heavily again on sunday morning - in fact, the last week has
been about the rainiest that i ever saw outside of england - and considering
the state of the roads south of eski baba, the prospects look favorable
for a sunday's experience in an interior turkish village.  men are solemnly
squatting around the benches of the mehana, smoking nargilehs and sipping
tiny cups of thick black coffee, and they look on in wonder while i
devour a substantial breakfast; but whether it is the novelty of seeing
a 'cycler feed, or the novelty of seeing anybody eat as i am doing, thus
early in the morning, i am unable to say; for no one else seems to partake
of much solid food until about noontide.  all the morning long, people
swarming around are importuning me with, " bin, bin, bin, monsieur."
the bicycle is locked up in a rear chamber, and thrice i accommodatingly
fetch it out and endeavor to appease their curiosity by riding along a
hundred-yard stretch of smooth road in the rear of the mehana; but their
importunities never for a moment cease.  finally the annoyance becomes
so unbearable that the proprietor takes pity on my harassed head, and,
after talking quite angrily to the crowd, locks me up in the same room
with the bicycle.  iron bars guard the rear windows of the houses at eski
baba, and ere i am fairly stretched out on my mat several swarthy faces
appear at the bars, and several voices simultaneously join in the dread
chorus of, " bin, bin, bin, monsieur! bin, bin." compelling me to close,
in the middle of a hot day-the rain having ceased about ten o'clock-the
one small avenue of ventilation in the stuffy little room.  a moment's
privacy is entirely out of the question, for, even with the window closed,
faces are constantly peering in, eager to catch even the smallest glimpse
of either me or the bicycle.  fate is also against me to-day, plainly
enough, for ere i have been imprisoned in the room an hour the door is
unlocked to admit the mulazim (lieutenant of gendarmes), and two of his
subordinates, with long cavalry swords dangling about their legs, after
the manner of the turkish police.

in addition to puzzling their sluggish brains about my passport, my
strange means of locomotion, and my affairs generally, they have now,
it seems, exercised their minds up to the point that they ought to
interfere in the matter of my revolver.  but first of all they want to
see my wonderful performance of riding a thing that cannot stand alone.
after i have favored the gendarmes and the assembled crowd by riding
once again, they return the compliment by tenderly escorting me down to
police headquarters, where, after spending an hour or so in examining
my passport, they place that document and my revolver in their strong
box, and lackadaisically wave me adieu.  upon returning to the mehana, i
find a corpulent pasha and a number of particularly influential turks
awaiting my reappearance, with the same diabolical object of asking me
to "bin! bin!" soon afterward come the two mohammedan priests, with the
same request; and certainly not less than half a dozen times during the
afternoon do i bring out the bicycle and ride, in deference to the
insatiable curiosity of the sure enough "unspeakable" turk; and every
separate time my audience consists not only of the people personally
making the request, but of the whole gesticulating male population.  the
proprietor of the mehana kindly takes upon himself the office of apprising
me when my visitors are people of importance, by going through the
pantomime of swelling his features and form up to a size corresponding
in proportion relative to their importance, the process of inflation in
the case of the pasha being quite a wonderful performance for a man who
is not a professional contortionist.

once during the afternoon i attempt to write, but i might as well attempt
to fly, for the mehana is crowded with people who plainly have not the
slightest conception of the proprieties.  finally a fez is wantonly flung,
by an extra-enterprising youth, at my ink-bottle, knocking it over, and
but for its being a handy contrivance, out of which the ink will not
spill, it would have made a mess of my notes.  seeing the uselessness of
trying to write, i meander forth, and into the leading mosque, and without
removing my shoes, tread its sacred floor for several minutes, and stand
listening to several devout mussulmans reciting the koran aloud, for,
be it known, the great fast of ramadan has begun, and fasting and prayer
is now the faithful mussulman's daily lot for thirty days, his religion
forbidding him either eating or drinking from early morn till close -
of day.  after looking about the interior, i ascend the steep spiral
stairway up to the minaret balcony whence the muezzin calls the faithful
to prayer five times a day.  as i pop my head out through the little
opening leading to the balcony, i am slightly taken aback by finding
that small footway already occupied by the muezzin, and it is a fair
question as to whether the muezzin's astonishment at seeing my white
helmet appear through the opening is greater, or mine at finding him
already in possession.  however, i brazen it out by joining him, and he,
like a sensible man, goes about his business just the same as if nobody
were about.  the people down in the streets look curiously up and call
one another's attention to the unaccustomed sight of a white-helmeted
'cycler and a muezzin upon the minaret together; but the fact that i am
not interfered with in any way goes far to prove that the mussulman
fanaticism, that we have all heard and read about so often, has wellnigh
flickered out in european turkey; moreover, i think the eski babans
would allow me to do anything, in order to place me under obligations to
"bin! bin!" whenever they ask me.  at nine o'clock i begin to grow a trifle
uneasy about the fate of my passport and revolver, and, proceeding to
the police-barracks, formally demand their return.  nothing has apparently
been done concerning either one or the other since they were taken from
me, for the mulazim, who is lounging on a divan smoking cigarettes,
produces them from the same receptacle he consigned them to this
afternoon, and lays them before him, clearly as mystified and perplexed
as ever about what he ought to do.  i explain to him that i wish to depart
in the morning, and gendarmes are despatched to summon several leading
eski babans for consultation, in the hope that some of them, or all of them
put together, might perchance arrive at a satisfactory conclusion
concerning me.  the great trouble appears to be that, while i got the
passport vised at sofia and philippopolis, i overlooked adrianople, and
the eski baba officials, being in the vilayet of the latter city, are
naturally puzzled to account for this omission; and, from what i can
gather of their conversation, some are advocating sending me back to
adrianople, a suggestion that i straightway announce my disapproval of
by again and again calling their attention to the vise of the turkish
consul-general in london, and giving them to understand, with much
emphasis, that this vise answers, for every part of turkey, including
the vilayet of adrianople.  the question then arises as to whether that
has anything to do with my carrying a revolver; to which i candidly reply
that it has not, at the same time pointing out that i have just come
through servia and bulgaria (countries in which the turks consider it
quite necessary to go armed, though in fact there is quite as much, if
not more, necessity for arms in turkey), and that i have come through
both mustapha pasha and adrianople without being molested on account of
the revolver; all of which only seems to mystify them the more, and make
them more puzzled than ever about what to do.  finally a brilliant idea
occurs to one of them, being nothing less than to shift the weight ot
the dreadful responsibility upon the authoritative shoulders of a visiting
pasha, an important personage who arrived in eski baba by carriage about
two hours ago, and whose arrival i remember caused quite a flurry of
excitement among the natives.  the pasha is found surrounded by a number
of bearded turks, seated cross-legged on a carpet in the open air, smoking
nargilehs and cigarettes, and sipping coffee.  this pasha is fatter and
more unwieldy, if possible, than the one for whose edification i rode
the bicycle this afternoon; noticing which, all hopes of being created
a pasha upon my arrival at constantinople naturally vanish, for evidently
one of the chief qualifications for a pashalic is obesity, a distinction
to which continuous 'cycling, in hot weather is hardly conducive.  the
pasha seems a good-natured person, after the manner of fat people
generally, and straightway bids me be seated on the carpet, and orders
coffee and cigarettes to be placed at my disposal while he examines my
case.  in imitation of those around me i make an effort to sit cross-legged
on the mat; but the position is so uncomfortable that i am quickly
compelled to change it, and i fancy detecting a merry twinkle in the eye
of more than one silent observer at my inability to adapt my posture to
the custom of the country.  i scarcely think the pasha knows anything
more about what sort of a looking document an english passport ought to
be, than does the mulazim and the leading citizens of eski baba; but he
goes through the farce of critically examining the vise of the turkish
consul-general in london, while another turk holds his lighted cigarette
close to it, and blows from it a feeble glimmer of light.  plainly the
pasha cannot make anything more out of it than the others, for many a
turkish pasha is unable to sign his own name intelligibly, using a seal
instead; but, probably with a view of favorably impressing those around
him, he asks me first if i am an englishman, and then if i am "a baron,"
doubtless thinking that an english baron is a person occupying a somewhat
similar position in english society to that of a pasha in turkish: viz.,
a really despotic sway over the people of his district; for, although
there are law and lawyers in turkey to-day, the pasha, especially in
country districts, is still an all-powerful person, practically doing
as he pleases.

to the first question i return an affirmative answer; the latter i pretend
not to comprehend; but i cannot help smiling at the question and the
manner in which it is put - seeing which the pasha and his friends smile
in response, and look knowingly at each other, as though thinking, " ah!
he is a baron, but don't intend to let us know it." whether this self-
arrived decision influences things in my favor i hardly know, but anyhow
he tosses me my passport, and orders the mulazim to return my revolver;
and as i mentally remark the rather jolly expression of the pasha's face,
i am inclined to think that, instead of treating the matter with the
ridiculous importance attached to it by the mulazim and the other people,
he regards the whole affair in the light of a few minutes' acceptable
diversion.  the pasha arrived too late this evening at eski baba to see
the bicycle: "will i allow a gendarme to go to the mehana and bring it
for his inspection?" "i will go and fetch it myself," i explain; and in
ten minutes the fat pasha and his friends are examining the perfect
mechanism of an american bicycle by the light of an american kerosene
lamp, which has been provided in the meantime.  some of the on-lookers,
who have seen me ride to-day, suggested to the pasha that i "bin! bin!"
and the pasha smiles approvingly at the suggestion; but by pantomime i
explain to him the impossibility of riding, owing to the nature of the
ground and the darkness, and i am really quite surprised at the readiness
with which he comprehends and accepts the situation.  the pasha is very
likely possessed of more intelligence than i have been giving him credit
for; anyhow he has in ten minutes proved himself equal to the situation,
which the mulazim and several prominent eski babans have puzzled their
collective brains over for an hour in vain, and, after he has inspected
the bicycle, and resumed his cross-legged position on the carpet, i doff
my helmet to him and those about him, and return to the mehana, well
satisfied with the turn affairs have taken.






chapter ix.




through european turkey.

on monday morning i am again awakened by the muezzin calling the mussulmans
to their early morning devotions, and, arising from my mat at five
o'clock, i mount and speed away southward from eski baba, not less than
a hundred people have collected to see the wonderful performance again.

all pretence of road-making seems to have been abandoned; or, what is
more probable, has never been seriously attempted, the visible roadways
from village to village being mere ox-wagon and pack-donkey tracks,
crossing the wheat-fields and uncultivated tracts in any direction.  the
soil is a loose, black loam, which the rain converts into mud, through
which i have to trundle, wooden scraper in hand; and i not infrequently
have to carry the bicycle through the worst places.  the morning is sultry,
requiring good roads and a breeze-creating pace for agreeable going.
harvesting and threshing are going forward briskly, but the busy hum of
the self-binder and the threshing-machine is not heard; the reaping is
done with rude hooks, and the threshing by dragging round and round,
with horses or oxen, sleigh-runner shaped, broad boards, roughed with
flints or iron points, making the surface resemble a huge rasp.  large
gangs of rough-looking armenians, arabs, and africans are harvesting the
broad acres of land-owning pashas, the gangs sometimes counting not less
than fifty men.  several donkeys are always observed picketed near them,
taken, wherever they go, for the purpose of carrying provisions and
water.  whenever i happen anywhere near one of these gangs they all come
charging across the field, reaping-hooks in hand, racing with each other
and good-naturedly howling defiance to competitors.  a band of zulus
charging down on a fellow, and brandishing their assegais, could scarcely
present a more ferocious front.  many of them wear no covering of any
kind on the upper part of the body, no hat, no foot-gear, nothing but a
pair of loose, baggy trousers, while the tidiest man among them would
be immediately arrested on general principles in either england or
america.  rough though they are, they appear, for the most part, to be
good-natured fellows, and although they sometimes emphasize their
importunities of "bin! bin!" by flourishing their reaping-hooks
threateningly over my head, and one gang actually confiscates the bicycle,
which they lay up on a shock of wheat, and with much flourishing of
reaping-hooks as they return to their labors, warn me not to take it
away, these are simply good-natured pranks, such as large gangs of
laborers are wont to occasionally indulge in the world over.

streams have to be forded to-day for the first time in europe, several
small creeks during the afternoon; and near sundown i find my pathway
into a village where i propose stopping for the night, obstructed by a
creek swollen bank-full by a heavy thunder-shower in the hills.  a couple
of lads on the opposite bank volunteer much information concerning the
depth of the creek at different points; no doubt their evident mystification
at not being understood is equalled only by the amazement at my answers.
four peasants come down to the creek, and one of them kindly wades in
and shows that it is only waist deep.  without more ado i ford it, with
the bicycle on my shoulder, and straight-way seek the accommodation of
the village mehana.  this village is a miserable little cluster of mud
hovels, and the best the mehana affords is the coarsest of black-bread
and a small salted fish, about the size of a sardine, which the natives
devour without any pretence of cooking, but which are worse than nothing
for me, since the farther they are away the better i am suited.  sticking
a flat loaf of black-bread and a dozen of these tiny shapes of salted
nothing in his broad waistband, the turkish peasant sallies forth
contentedly to toil.

i have accomplished the wonderful distance of forty kilometres to-day,
at which i am really quite surprised, considering everything.  the usual
daily weather programme has been faithfully carried out - a heavy mist at
morning, that has prevented any drying up of roads during the night,
three hours of oppressive heat - from nine till twelve - during which myraids
of ravenous flies squabble for the honor of drawing your blood, and then,
when the mud begins to dry out sufficient to justify my dispensing with
the wooden scraper, thunder-showers begin to bestow their unappreciated
favor upon the roads, making them well-nigh impassable again.  the following
morning the climax of vexation is reached when, after wading through the
mud for two hours, i discover that i have been dragging, carrying, and
trundling my laborious way along in the wrong direction for tchorlu,
which is not over thirty-five kilometres from my starting-point, but it
takes me till four o'clock to reach there.  a hundred miles on french or
english roads would not be so fatiguing, and i wisely take advantage of
being in a town where comparatively decent accommodations are obtainable
to make up, so far as possible, for this morning's breakfast of black
bread and coffee, and my noontide meal of cold, cheerless reflections
on the same.  the same programme of "bin! bin." from importuning crowds,
and police inquisitiveness concerning my "passporte" are endured and
survived; but i spread myself upon rny mat to-night thoroughly convinced
that a month's cycling among the turks would worry most people into
premature graves.

i am now approaching pretty close to the sea of marmora, and next morning
i am agreeably surprised to find sandy roads, which the rains have rather
improved than otherwise; and although much is unridably heavy, it is
immeasurably superior to yesterday's mud.  i pass the country residence
of a wealthy pasha, and see the ladies of his harem seated in the meadow
hard by, enjoying the fresh morning air.  they form a circle, facing
inward, and the swarthy eunuch in charge stands keeping watch at a
respectful distance.  i carry a pocketful of bread with me this morning,
and about nine o'clock, upon coming to a ruined mosque and a few deserted
buildings, i approach one at which signs of occupation are visible, for
some water.  this place is simply a deserted mussulman village, from which
the inhabitants probably decamped in a body during the last russo-turkish
war; the mosque is in a tumble-down condition, the few dwelling-houses
remaining are in the last stages of dilapidation, and the one i call at
is temporarily occupied by some shepherds, two of whom are regaling
themselves with food of some kind out of an earthenware vessel.

obtaining the water, i sit down on some projecting boards to eat my
frugal lunch, fully conscious of being an object of much furtive speculation
on the part of the two occupants of the deserted house; which, however,
fails to strike me as anything extraordinary, since these attentions
have long since become an ordinary every-day affair.  not even the sulky
and rather hang-dog expression of the men, which failed not to escape
my observation at my first approach, awakened any shadow of suspicion
in my mind of their being possibly dangerous characters, although the
appearance of the place itself is really sufficient to make one hesitate
about venturing near; and upon sober after-thought i am fully satisfied
that this is a resort of a certain class of disreputable characters,
half shepherds, half brigands, who are only kept from turning full-fledged
freebooters by a wholesome fear of retributive justice.  while i am
discussing my bread and water one of these worthies saunters with assumed
carelessness up behind me and makes a grab for my revolver, the butt of
which he sees protruding from the holster.  although i am not exactly
anticipating this movement, travelling alone among strange people makes
one's faculties of self-preservation almost mechanically on the alert,
and my hand reaches the revolver before his does.  springing up, i turn
round and confront him and his companion, who is standing in the doorway.
a full exposition of their character is plainly stamped on their faces,
and for a moment i am almost tempted to use the revolver on them.  whether
they become afraid of this or whether they have urgent business of some
nature will never be known to me, but they both disappear inside the
door; and, in view of my uncertainty of their future intentions, i
consider it advisable to meander on toward the coast.

ere i get beyond the waste lands adjoining this village i encounter two
more of these shepherds, in charge of a small flock; they are watering
their sheep; and as i go over to the spring, ostensibly to obtain a
drink, but really to have a look at them, they both sneak off at my
approach, like criminals avoiding one whom they suspect of being a
detective.  take it all in all, i am satisfied that this neighborhood is
a place that i have been fortunate in coming through in broad daylight;
by moonlight it might have furnished a far more interesting item than
the above.  an hour after, i am gratified at obtaining my first glimpse
of the sea of marmora off to the right, and in another hour i am disporting
in the warm clear surf, a luxury that has not been within my reach since
leaving dieppe, and which is a thrice welcome privilege in this land,
where the usual ablutions at mehanas consist of pouring water on the
hands from a tin cup.  the beach is composed of sand and tiny shells, the
warm surf-waves are clear as crystal, and my first plunge in the marmora,
after a two months' cycle tour across a continent, is the most thoroughly
enjoyable bath i ever had; notwithstanding, i feel it my duty to keep a
loose eye on some shepherds perched on a handy knoll, who look as if
half inclined to slip down and examine my clothes.  the clothes, with,
of course, the revolver and every penny i have with me, are almost as
near to them as to me, and always, after ducking my head under water,
my first care is to take a precautionary glance in their direction.
"cursed is the mind that nurses suspicion," someone has said; but under
the circumstances almost anybody would be suspicious.  these shepherds
along the marmora coast favor each other a great deal,: and when a person
has been the recipient of undesirable attention from one of them, to
look askance at the next one met with comes natural enough.

over the undulating cliffs and along the sandy beach, my road now leads
through the pretty little seaport of cilivria, toward constantinople,
traversing a most lovely stretch of country, where waving wheat-fields
hug the beach and fairly coquet with the waves, and the slopes are green
and beautiful with vineyards and fig-gardens, while away beyond the
glassy shimmer of the sea i fancy i can trace on the southern horizon
the inequalities of the hills of asia minor.  greek fishing-boats are
plying hither and thither; one noble sailing-vessel, with all sails set,
is slowly ploughing her way down toward the dardanelles - probably a grain-
ship from the black sea - and the smoke from a couple of steamers is
discernible in the distance.  flourishing greek fishing-villages and vine-
growing communities occupy this beautiful strip of coast, along which
the greeks seem determined to make the cross as much more conspicuous
than the crescent as possible, by rearing it on every public building
under their control, and not infrequently on private ones as well.  the
people of these greek villages seem possessed of sunny dispositions, the
absence of all reserve among the women being in striking contrast to the
demeanor of the turkish fair sex.  these greek women chatter after me
from the windows as i wheel past, and if i stop a minute in the street
they gather around by dozens, smiling pleasantly, and plying me with
questions, which, of course, i cannot understand.  some of them are quite
handsome, and nearly all have perfect white teeth, a fact that i have
ample opportunity of knowing, since they seem to be all smiles.  there
has been much making of artificial highways leading from constantinople
in this direction in ages past.  a road-bed of huge blocks of stone, such
as some of the streets of eastern towns are made impassable with, is
traceable for miles, ascending and descending the rolling hills,
imperishable witnesses of the wide difference in eastern and western
ideas of making a road.  these are probably the work of the people who
occupied this country before the ottoman turks, who have also tried their
hands at making a macadam, which not infrequently runs close along-side
the old block roadway, and sometimes crosses it; and it is matter of
some wonderment that the turks, instead of hauling material for their
road from a distance did not save expense by merely breaking the stones
of the old causeway and using the same road-bed.  twice to-day i have
been required to produce my passport, and when toward evening i pass
through a small village, the lone gendarme who is smoking a nargileh in
front of the mehana where i halt points to my revolver and demands
"passaporte," i wave examination, so to speak, by arguing the case with
him, and by the not always unhandy plan of pretending not exactly to
comprehend his meaning.  "passaporte! passaporte! gendarmerie, me, "
replies the officer, authoritatively, in answer to my explanation of a
voyager being privileged to carry a revolver; while several villagers
who have gathered around us interpose "bin! bin! monsieur, bin! bin."
i have little notion of yielding up either revolver or passport to this
village gendarme, for much of their officiousness is simply the disposition
to show off their authority and satisfy their own personal curiosity
regarding me, to say nothing of the possibility of coming in for a little
backsheesh.  the villagers are worrying me to "bin! bin!" at the same
time the gendarme is worrying me about the revolver and passport, and
knowing from previous experience that the gendarme would never stop me
from mounting, being quite as anxious to witness the performance as the
villagers, i quickly decide upon killing two birds with one stone, and
accordingly mount, and pick my way along the rough street out on to the
constantinople road.  the gloaming settles into darkness, and the domes
and minarets of stamboul, which have been visible from the brow of every
hill for several miles back, are still eight or ten miles away, and
rightly judging that the ottoman capital is a most bewildering city for
a stranger to penetrate after night, i pillow my head on a sheaf of oats,
within sight of the goal toward which i have been pedalling for some
2,500 miles since leaving liverpool.  after surveying with a good deal
of satisfaction the twinkling lights that distinguish every minaret in
constantinople each night during the fast of ramadan, i fall asleep, and
enjoy, beneath a sky in which myriads of far-off lamps seem to be twinkling
mockingly at the ramadan illuminations, the finest night's repose i have
had for a week.  nothing but the prevailing rains have prevented me from
sleeping beneath the starry dome entirely in peference to putting up at
the village mehanas.

en route into stamboul, on the following morning, i meet the first train
of camels i have yet encountered; in the gray of the morning, with the
scenes around so thoroughly oriental, it seems like an appropriate
introduction to asiatic life.  eight o'clock finds me inside the line of
earthworks thrown up by baker pasha when the russians were last knocking
at the gates of constantinople, and ere long i am trundling through the
crooked streets of the turkish capital toward the bridge which connects
stamboul with galata and pera.  even here my ears are assailed with the
eternal importunities to "bin! bin!" the officers collecting the bridge-
toll even joining in the request.  to accommodate them i mount, and ride
part way across the bridge, and at 9 o'clock on july 2d, just two calendar
months from the start at liverpool, i am eating my breakfast in a
constantinople restaurant.  i am not long in finding english-speaking
friends, to whom my journey across the two continents is not unknown,
and who kindly direct me to the chamber of commerce hotel, eue omar,
galata, a home-like establishment, kept by an english lady.  i have been
purposing of late to remain in constantinople during the heated term of
july and august, thinking to shape my course southward through asia minor
and down the euphrates valley to bagdad, and by taking a south-easterly
direction as far as circumstances would permit into india, keep pace
with the seasons, thus avoiding the necessity of remaining over anywhere
for the winter.  at the same time i have been reckoning upon meeting
englishmen in constantinople who, having travelled extensively in asia,
could further enlighten me regarding the best route to india.  as i house
my bicycle and am shown to my room i take a retrospective glance across
europe and america, and feel almost as if i have arrived at the half-way
house of my journey.  the distance from liverpool to constantinople is
fully 2,500 miles, which brings the wheeling distance from san francisco
up to something over 6,000.  so far as the, distance wheeled and to be
wheeled is concerned, it is not far from half-way; but the real difficulties
of the journey are still ahead, although i scarcely anticipate any that
time and perseverance will not overcome.  my tour across europe has been,
on the whole, a delightful journey, and, although my linguistic shortcomings
have made it rather awkward in interior places where no english-speaking
person was to be found, i always managed to make myself understood
sufficiently to get along.  in the interior of turkey a knowledge of
french has been considered indispensable to a traveller: but, although
a full knowledge of that language would have made matters much smoother
by enabling me to converse with officials and others, i have nevertheless
come through all right without it; and there have doubtless been occasions
when my ignorance has saved me from a certain amount of bother with the
gendarmerie, who, above all things, dislike to exercise their thinking
apparatus.  a turkish official is far less indisposed to act than he is
to think; his mental faculties work sluggishly, but his actions are
governed largely by the impulse of the moment.

someone has said that to see constantinople is to see the entire east;
and judging from the different costumes and peoples one meets on the
streets and in the bazaars, the saying is certainly not far amiss.  from
its geographical situation, as well as from its history, constantinople
naturally takes the front rank among the cosmopolitan cities of the
world, and the crowds thronging its busy thoroughfares embrace every
condition of man between the kid-gloved exquisite without a wrinkle in
his clothes and the representative of half-savage central asian states
incased in sheepskin garments of rudest pattern.  the great fast of ramadan
is under full headway, and all true mussulmans neither eat nor drink a
particle of anything throughout the day until the booming of cannon at
eight in the evening announces that the fast is ended, when the scene
quickly changes into a general rush for eatables and drink.  between eight
and nine o'clock in the evening, during ramadan, certain streets and
bazaars present their liveliest appearance, and from the highest-classed
restaurant patronized by bey and pasha to the venders of eatables on the
streets, all do a rushing business; even the mjees (water-venders), who
with leather water-bottles and a couple of tumblers wait on thirsty
pedestrians with pure drinking water, at five paras a glass, dodge about
among the crowds, announcing themselves with lusty lung, fully alive to
the opportunities of the moment.

a few of the coffee-houses provide music of an inferior quality,
constantinople not being a very musical place.  a forenoon hour spent in
a neighborhood of private residences will repay a stranger for his
trouble, since he will during that time see a bewildering assortment of
street-venders, from a peregrinating meat-market, with a complete stock
dangling from a wooden framework attached to a horse's back, to a grimy
individual worrying along beneath a small mountain of charcoal, and each
with cries more or less musical.  the sidewalks of constantinople are
ridiculously narrow, their only practical use being to keep vehicles
from running into the merchandise of the shopkeepers, and to give
pedestrians plenty of exercise in jostling each other, and hopping on
and off the curbstone to avoid inconveniencing the ladies, who of course
are not to be jostled either off the sidewalk or into a sidewalk stock
of miscellaneous merchandise.  the constantinople sidewalk is anybody's
territory; the merchant encumbers it with his wares and the coffee-houses
with chairs for customers to sit on, the rights of pedestrians being
altogether ignored; the natural consequence is that these latter fill
the streets, and the constantinople jehu not only has to keep his wits
about him to avoid running over men and dogs, but has to use his lungs
continually, shouting at them to clear the way.  if a seat is taken in
one of the coffee-house chairs, a watchful waiter instantly makes his
appearance with a tray containing small chunks of a pasty sweetmeat,
known in england as " turkish delight," one of which you are expected
to take and pay half a piastre for, this being a polite way of obtaining
payment for the privilege of using the chair.  the coffee is served
steaming hot in tiny cups holding about two table-spoonfuls, the price
varying from ten paras upward, according to the grade of the establishment.
a favorite way of passing the evening is to sit in front of one of these
establishments, watching the passing throngs, and smoke a nargileh, this
latter requiring a good half-hour to do it properly.  i undertook to
investigate the amount of enjoyment contained in a nargileh one evening,
and before smoking it half through concluded that the taste has to be
cultivated.

one of the most inconvenient things about constantinople is the great
scarcity of small change.  everybody seems to be short of fractional money
save the money-changers-people who are here a genuine necessity, since
one often has to patronize them before making the most trifling purchase.
ofttimes the store-keeper will refuse point-blank to sell an article
when change is required, solely on account of his inability or unwillingness
to supply it.  after drinking a cup of coffee, i have had the kahuajee
refuse to take any payment rather than change a cherik.  inquiring the
reason for this scarcity, i am informed that whenever there is any new
output of this money the noble army of money-changers, by a liberal and
judicious application of backsheesh, manage to get a corner on the lot
and compel the general public, for whose benefit it is ostensibly issued,
to obtain what they require through them.  however this may be, they
manage to control its circulation to a great extent; for while their
glass cases display an overflowing plenitude, even the fruit-vender,
whose transactions are mainly of ten and twenty paras, is not infrequently
compelled to lose a customer because of his inability to make change.
there are not less than twenty money-changers' offices within a hundred
yards of the galata end of the principal bridge spanning the golden horn,
and certainly not a less number on the stamboul side.

the money-changer usually occupies a portion of the frontage of a cigarette
and tobacco stand; and on all the business streets one happens at frequent
intervals upon these little glass cases full of bowls and heaps of
miscellaneous coins, varying in value.  behind sits a business-looking
person - usually a jew - jingling a handful of medjedis, and expectantly
eyeing every approaching stranger.  the usual percentage charged is, for
changing a lira, eighty paras; thirty paras for a medjedie, and ten for
a cherik, the percentage on this latter coin being about five per cent.
some idea of the inconvenience to the public of this state of affairs
can be better imagined by the american by reflecting that if this state
of affairs existed in boston he would frequently have to walk around the
block and give a money-changer five per cent, for changing a dollar
before venturing upon the purchase of a dish of baked beans.  if one
offers a coin of the larger denominations in payment of an article, even
in quite imposing establishments, they look as black over it as though
you were trying to palm off a counterfeit, and hand back the change with
an ungraciousness and an evident reluctance that makes a sensitive person
feel as though he has in some way been unwittingly guilty of a mean
action.  even the principal streets of constantinople are but indifferently
lighted at night, and, save for the feeble glimmer of kerosene lamps in
front of stores and coffee-houses, the by-streets are in darkness.  small
parties of turkish women are encountered picking their way along the
streets of galata in charge of a male attendant, who walks a little way
behind, if of the better class, or without the attendant in the case of
poorer people, carrying small japanese lanterns.  sometimes a lantern
will go out, or doesn't burn satisfactorily, and the whole party halts
in the middle of the, perhaps, crowded thoroughfare, and clusters around
until the lantern is radjusted.  the turkish lady walks with a slouchy
gait, her shroud-like abbas adding not a little to the ungracefulness.
matters are likewise scarcely to be improved by wearing two pairs of
shoes, the large, slipper-like overshoes being required by etiquette to
be left on the mat upon entering the house she is visiting; and in the
case of a strictly orthodox mussulman lady - and, doubtless, we may also
easily imagine in case of a not over-prepossessing countenance - the yashmak
hides all but the eyes.  the eyes of many turkish ladies are large and
beautiful, and peep from between the white, gauzy folds of the yashmak
with an effect upon the observant frank not unlike coquettishly ogling
from behind a fan.  handsome young turkish ladies with a leaning toward
western ideas are no doubt coming to understand this, for many are
nowadays met on the streets wearing yashmaks that are but a single
thickness of transparent gauze that obscures never a feature, at the
same time producing the decidedly interesting and taking effect above
mentioned.  it is readily seen that the wearing of yashmaks must be quite
a charitable custom in the case of a lady not blessed with a handsome
face, since it enables her to appear in public the equal of her more
favored sister in commanding whatever homage is to be derived from that
mystery which is said to be woman's greatest charm; and if she has but
the one redeeming feature of a beautiful pair of eyes, the advantage is
obvious.  in street-cars, steamboats, and all public conveyances, board
or canvas partitions wall off a small compartment for the exclusive use
of ladies, where, hidden from the rude gaze of the frank, the turkish
lady can remove her yashmak and smoke cigarettes.

on sunday, july 12th, in company with an englishman in the turkish
artillery service, i pay my first visit to asian soil, taking a caique
across the bosphorus to kadikeui, one of the many delightful seaside
resorts within easy distance of constantinople.  many objects of interest
are pointed out, as, propelled by a couple of swarthy, half-naked caique-
jees, the sharp-prowed caique gallantly rides the blue waves of this
loveliest of all pieces of land-environed water.  more than once i have
noticed that a firm belief in the supernatural has an abiding hold upon
the average turkish mind, having frequently during my usual evening
promenade through the galata streets noted the expression of deep and
genuine earnestness upon the countenances of fez-crowned citizens giving
respectful audience to arab fortune-tellers, paying twenty-para pieces
for the revelations he is favoring them with, and handing over the coins
with the business-like air of people satisfied that they are getting its
full equivalent.  consequently i am not much astonished when, rounding
seraglio point, my companion calls my attention to several large sections
of whalebone suspended on the wall facing the water, and tells me that
they are placed there by the fishermen, who believe them to be a talisman
of no small efficacy in keeping the bosphorus well supplied with fish,
they firmly adhering to the story that once, when the bones were removed,
the fish nearly all disappeared.  the oars used by the caique-jees are
of quite a peculiar shape, the oar-shaft immediately next the hand-hold
swells into a bulbous affair for the next eighteen inches, which is at
least four times the circumference of the remainder, and the end of the
oarblade is for some reason made swallow-tailed.  the object of the
enlarged portion, which of course comes inside the rowlocks, appears to
be the double purpose of balancing the weight of the longer portion
outside, and also for preventing the oar at all times from escaping into
the water.  the rowlock is simply a raw-hide loop, kept well greased, and
as, toward the end of every stroke, the caique-jee leans back to his
work, the oar slips several inches, causing a considerable loss of power.
the day is warm, the broiling sun shines directly down on the bare heads
of the caique-jees. and causes the perspiration to roll off their swarthy
faces in large beads, but they lay back to their work manfully, although,
from early morning until cannon roar at 8 p.m. neither bite nor sup, not
even so much water as to moisten the end of their parched tongues, will
pass their lips; for, although but poor hard- working caique-jees, they
are true mussulmans.  pointing skyward from the summit of the hill back
of seraglio point are the four tapering minarets of the world-renowned
st. sophia mosque, and a little farther to the left is the sultana achmet
mosque, the only mosque in all mohammedanism with six minarets.  near by
is the old seraglio palace, or rather what is left of it, built by
mohammed ii. in 1467, out of materials from the ancient byzantine palaces,
and in a department of which the sanjiak shereef (holy standard), boorda-y
shereef (holy mantle), and other venerated relics of the prophet mohammed
are preserved.  to this place, on the 15th of ramadan, the sultan and
leading dignitaries of the empire repair to do homage to the holy relics,
upon which it would be the highest sacrilege for christian eyes to gaze.
the hem of this holy mantle is reverently kissed by the sultan and the
few leading personages present, after which the spot thus brought in
contact with human lips is carefully wiped with an embroidered napkin
dipped in a golden basin of water; the water used in this ceremony is
then supposed to be of priceless value as a purifier of sin, and is
carefully preserved, and, corked up in tiny phials, is distributed among
the sultanas, grand dignitaries, and prominent people of the realm, who
in return make valuable presents to the lucky messengers and mussulman
ecclesiastics employed in its distribution.  this precious liquid is doled
out drop by drop, as though it were nectar of eternal life received
direct from heaven, and, mixed with other water, is drunk immediately
upon breaking fast each evening during the remaining fifteen days of
ramadan.  arriving at kadikeui, the opportunity presents of observing
something of the high-handed manner in which turkish pashas are wont to
expect from inferiors their every whim obeyed.  we meet a friend of my
companion, a pasha, who for the remainder of the afternoon makes one of
our company.  unfortunately for a few other persons the pasha is in a
whimsical mood to-day and inclined to display for our benefit rather
arbitrary authority toward others.  the first individual coming under his
immediate notice is a young man torturing a harp.  summoning the musician,
the pasha summarily orders him to play "yankee doodle." the writer
arrived in constantinople with the full impression that it was the mosqne
of st. sophia that has the famons six minarets, having, i am quite sure,
seen it thus quite frequently accredited in print, and i mention this
especially, in order that readers who may have been similarly misinformed
may know that the above account is the correct one, does not know it,
and humbly begs the pasha to name something more familiar.  "yankee
doodle!" - replies the pasha peremptorily.  the poor man looks as though
he would willingly relinquish all hopes of the future if only some present
avenue of escape would offer itself; but nothing of the kind seems at
all likely.  the musician appeals to my turkish-speaking friend, and begs
him to request me to favor him with the tune.  i am of course only too
glad to help him stem the rising tide of the pasha's wrath by whistling
the tune for him; and after a certain amount of preliminary twanging be
strikes up and manages to blunder through "yankee doodle." the pasha,
after ascertaining from me that the performance is creditable, considering
the circumstances, forthwith hands him more money than he would collect
among the poorer patrons of the place in two hours.  soon a company of
five strolling acrobats and conjurers happens along, and these likewise
are summoned into the "presence" and ordered to proceed.  many of the
conjurer's tricks are quite creditable performances; but the pasha
occasionally interferes in the proceedings just in the nick of time to
prevent the prestidigitator finishing his manipulations, much to the
pasha's delight.  once, however, he cleverly manages to hoodwink the
pasha, and executes his trick in spite of the latter's interference,
which so amuses the pasha that he straightway gives him a medjedie.  our
return boat to galata starts at seven o'clock, and it is a ten minutes'
drive down to the landing.  at fifteen minutes to seven the pasha calls
for a public carriage to take us down to the steamer.

"there are no carriages, pasha effendi.  those three are all engaged by
ladies and gentlemen in the garden," exclaims the waiter, respectfully.

"engaged or not engaged, i want that open carriage yonder," replies the
pasha authoritatively, and already beginning to show signs of impatience."
boxhanna.  "(hi, you, there!)" drive around here," addressing the driver.

the driver enters a plea of being already engaged.  the pasha's temper
rises to the point of threatening to throw carriage, horses, and driver
into the bosphorus if his demands are not instantly complied with.  finally
the driver and everybody else interested collapse completely, and,
entering the carriage, we are driven to our destination without another
murmur.  subsequently i learned that a government officer, whether a pasha
or of lower rank, has the power of taking arbitrary possession of a
public conveyance over the head of a civilian, so that our pasha was,
after all, only sticking up for the rights of himself and my friend of
the artillery, who likewise wears the mark by which a military man is
in turkey always distinguishable from a civilian - a longer string to the
tassel of his fez.

this is the last day of ramadan, and the following monday ushers in the
three days' feast of biaram, which is in substance a kind of a general
carousal to compensate for the rigid self-denial of the thirty days
'fasting and prayer' just ended.  the government offices and works are
till closed, everybody is wearing new clothes, and holiday-making engrosses
the public attention.  a friend proposes a trip on a bosphorus steamer
up as far as the entrance to the black sea.  the steamers are profusely
decorated with gaycolored flags, and at certain hours all war-ships
anchored in the bosphorus, as well as the forts and arsenals, fire
salutes, the roar and rattle of the great guns echoing among the hills
of europe and asia, that here confront each other, with but a thousand
yards of dancing blue waters between them.  all along either lovely shore
villages and splendid country-seats of wealthy pashas and constantinople
merchants dot the verdure-clad slopes.  two white marble kiosks of the
sultan are pointed out.  the old castles of europe and asia face each
other on opposite sides of the narrow channel.  they were famous fortresses
in their day, but, save as interesting relics of a bygone age, they are
no longer of any use.  at therapia are the summer residences of the
different ambassadors, the english and french the most conspicuous.  the
extensive grounds of the former are most beautifully terraced, and
evidently fit for the residence of royalty itself.  happy indeed is the
constantinopolitan whose income commands a summer villa in therapia, or
at any of the many desirable locations in plain view within this earthly
paradise of blue waves and sunny slopes, and a yacht in which to wing
his flight whenever and wherever fancy bids him go.  in the glitter and
glare of the mid-day sun the scene along the bosphorus is lovely, yet
its loveliness is plainly of the earth; but as we return cityward in the
eventide the dusky shadows of the gloaming settle over everything.  as
we gradually approach, the city seems half hidden behind a vaporous veil,
as though, in imitation of thousands of its fair occupants, it were
hiding its comeliness behind the yashmak; the scores of tapering minarets,
and the towers, and the masts of the crowded shipping of all nations
rise above the mist, and line with delicate tracery the western sky,
already painted in richest colors by the setting sun.  on saturday morning,
july 18th, the sound of martial music announces the arrival of the
soldiers from stamboul, to guard the streets through which the sultan
will pass on his way to a certain mosque to perform some ceremony in
connection with the feast just over.  at the designated place i find the
streets already lined with circassian cavalry and ethiopian zouaves; the
latter in red and blue zouave costumes and immense turbans.  mounted
gendarmes are driving civilians about, first in one direction and then
in another, to try and get the streets cleared, occasionally fetching
some unlucky wight in the threadbare shirt of the galata plebe a stinging
cut across the shoulders with short raw-hide whips - a glaring injustice
that elicits not the slightest adverse criticism from the spectators,
and nothing but silent contortions of face and body from the individual
receiving the attention.  i finally obtain a good place, where nothing
but an open plank fence and a narrow plot of ground thinly set with
shrubbery intervenes between me and the street leading from the palace.
in a few minutes the approach of the sultan is announced by the appearance
of half a dozen circassian outriders, who dash wildly down the streets,
one behind the other, mounted on splendid dapple-gray chargers; then
come four close carriages, containing the sultan's mother and leading
ladies of the imperial harem, and a minute later appears a mounted guard,
two abreast, keen-eyed fellows, riding slowly, and critically eyeing
everybody and everything as they proceed; behind them comes a gorgeously
arrayed individual in a perfect blaze of gold braid and decorations, and
close behind him follows the sultan's carriage, surrounded by a small
crowd of pedestrians and horsemen, who buzz around the imperial carriage
like bees near a hive, the pedestrians especially dodging about hither
and thither, hopping nimbly over fences, crossing gardens, etc., keeping
pace with the carriage meanwhile, as though determined upon ferreting out
and destroying anything in the shape of danger that may possibly be
lurking along the route.  my object of seeing the sultan's face is gained;
but it is only a momentary glimpse, for besides the horsemen flitting
around the carriage, an officer suddenly appears in front of my position
and unrolls a broad scroll of paper with something printed on it, which
he holds up.  whatever the scroll is, or the object of its display may
be, the sultan bows his acknowledgments, either to the scroll or to the
officer holding it up.

ere i am in the ottoman capital a week, i have the opportunity of
witnessing a fire, and the workings of the constantinople fire department.
while walking along tramway street, a hue and cry of' "yangoonvar!
yangoonvar!" (there is fire! there is fire!) is raised, and three
barefooted men, dressed in the scantiest linen clothes, come charging
pell-mell through the crowded streets, flourishing long brass hose-nozzles
to clear the way; behind them comes a crowd of about twenty others,
similarly dressed, four of whom are bearing on their
shoulders a primitive wooden pump, while others are carrying leathern
water-buckets.  they are trotting along at quite a lively pace, shouting
and making much unnecessary commotion, and lastly comes their chief on
horseback, cantering close at their heels, as though to keep the men
well up to their pace.  the crowds of pedestrians, who refrain from
following after the firemen, and who scurried for the sidewalks at their
approach, now resume their place in the middle of the street; but again
the wild cry of "yangoon var!" resounds along the narrow street, and
the same scene of citizens scuttling to the sidewalks, and a hurrying
fire brigade followed by a noisy crowd of gamins, is enacted over again,
as another and yet another of these primitive organizations go scooting
swiftly past.  it is said that these nimble-footed firemen do almost
miraculous work, considering the material they have at command - an
assertion which i think is not at all unlikely; but the wonder is that
destructive fires are not much more frequent, when the fire department
is evidently so inefficient.  in addition to the regular police force and
fire department, there is a system of night watchmen, called bekjees,
who walk their respective beats throughout the night, carrying staves
heavily shod with iron, with which they pound the flagstones with a
resounding "thwack."  owing to the hilliness of the city and the roughness
of the streets, much of the carrying business of the city is done by
hamals, a class of sturdy-limbed men, who, i am told, are mostly armenians.
they wear a sort of pack-saddle, and carry loads the mere sight of which
makes the average westerner groan.  for carrying such trifles as crates
and hogsheads of crockery and glass-ware, and puncheons of rum, four
hamals join strength at the ends of two stout poles.  scarcely less
marvellous than the weights they carry is the apparent ease with which
they balance tremendous loads, piled high up above them, it being no
infrequent sight to see a stalwart hamal with a veritable saratoga trunk,
for size, on his back, with several smaller trunks and valises piled
above it, making his way down step street, which is as much as many
pedestrians can do to descend without carrying anything.  one of these
hamals, meandering along the street with six or seven hundred pounds of
merchandise on his back, has the legal right - to say nothing of the evident
moral right - to knock over any unloaded citizen who too tardily yields
the way.  from observations made on the spot, one cannot help thinking
that there is no law in any country to be compared to this one, for
simon-pure justice between man and man.  these are most assuredly the
strongest-backed and hardest working men i have seen anywhere.  they are
remarkably trustworthy and sure-footed, and their chief ambition, i am
told, is to save sufficient money to return to the mountains and valleys
of their native armenia, where most of them have wives patiently awaiting
their coming, and purchase a piece of land upon which to spend their
declining years in ease and independence.

far different is the daily lot of another habitue of the streets of this
busy capital - large, pugnacious-looking rams, that occupy pretty much the
same position in turkish sporting circles that thoroughbred bull-dogs
do in england, being kept by young turks solely on account of their
combative propensities and the facilities thereby afforded for gambling
on the prowess of their favorite animals.  at all hours of the day and
evening the constantinople sport may be met on the streets leading his
woolly pet tenderly with a string, often carrying something in his hand
to coax the ram along.  the wool of these animals is frequently clipped
to give them a fanciful aspect, the favorite clip being to produce a
lion-like appearance, and they are always carefully guarded against the
fell influence of the "evil eye" by a circlet of blue beads and pendent
charms suspended from the neck.  this latter precautionary measure is not
confined to these hard-headed contestants for the championship of galata,
pera, and stamboul, however, but grace the necks of a goodly proportion
of all animals met on the streets, notably the saddle-ponies, whose
services are offered on certain streetcorners to the public.

occasionally one notices among the busy throngs a person wearing a turban
of dark green; this distinguishing mark being the sole privilege of
persons who have made the pilgrimage to mecca.  all true mussulmans are
supposed to make this pilgrimage some time during their lives, either
in person or by employing a substitute to go in their stead, wealthy
pashas sometimes paying quite large sums to some imam or other holy
person to go as their proxy, for the holier the substitute the greater
is supposed to be the benefit to the person sending him.  other persons
are seen with turbans of a lighter shade of green than the returned mecca
pilgrims.  these are people related in some way to the reigning sovereign.

constantinople has its peculiar attractions as the great centre of the
mohammedan world as represented in the person of the sultan, and during
the five hundred years of the ottoman dominion here, almost every sultan
and great personage has left behind him some interesting reminder of the
times in which he lived and the wonderful possibilities of unlimited
wealth and power.  a stranger will scarcely show himself upon the streets
ere he is discovered and accosted by a guide.  from long experience these
men can readily distinguish a new arrival, and they seldom make a mistake
regarding his nationality.  their usual mode of self-introduction is to
approach him, and ask if he is looking for the american consulate, or
the english post-office, as the case may be, and if the stranger replies
in the affirmative, to offer to show the way.  nothing is mentioned about
charges, and the uninitiated new arrival naturally wonders what kind of
a place he has got into, when, upon offering what his experience in
western countries has taught him to consider a most liberal recompense,
the guide shrugs his shoulders, and tells you that he guided a gentleman
the same distance yesterday and the gentleman gave - usually about double
what you are offering, no matter whether it be one cherik or half a
dozen.  an afternoon ramble with a guide through stamboul embraces the
museum of antiquities, the st. sophia mosque, the costume museum, the
thousand and one columns, the tomb of sultan mahmoud, the world-renowned
stamboul bazaar, the pigeon mosque, the saraka tower, and the tomb of
sultan suliman i.  passing over the museum of antiquities, which to the
average observer is very similar to a dozen other institutions of the
kind, the visitor very naturally approaches the portals of the st. sophia
mosque with expectations enlivened by having already read wondrous
accounts of its magnificence and unapproachable grandeur.  but, let one's
fancy riot as it will, there is small fear of being disappointed in the
"finest mosque in constantinople." at the door one either has to take
off his shoes and go inside in stocking-feet, or, in addition to the
entrance fee of two cheriks, "backsheesh" the attendant for the use of
a pair of overslippers.  people with holes in their socks and young men
wearing boots three sizes too small are the legitimate prey of the
slipper-man, since the average human would yield up almost his last
piastre rather than promenade around in st. sophia with his big toe
protruding through his foot-gear like a mud-turtle's head, or run the
risk of having to be hauled bare-footed to his hotel in a hack, from the
impossibility of putting his boots on again.  devout mussulmans are bowing
their foreheads down to the mat-covered floor in a dozen different parts
of the mosque as we enter; tired-looking pilgrims from a distance are
curled up in cool corners, happy in the privilege of peacefully slumbering
in the holy atmosphere of the great edifice they have, perhaps, travelled
hundreds of miles to see; a dozen half-naked youngsters are clambering
about the railings and otherwise disporting themselves after the manner
of unrestrained juveniles everywhere - free to gambol about to their
hearts' content, providing they abstain from making a noise that would
interfere with devotions.  upon the marvellous mosaic ceiling of the great
dome is a figure of the virgin mary, which the turks have frequently
tried to cover up by painting it over; but paint as often as they will,
the figure will not be concealed.  on one of the upper galleries are the
"gate of heaven " and "gate of hell," the former of which the turks
once tried their best to destroy; but every arm that ventured to raise
a tool against it instantly became paralyzed, when the would-be destroyers
naturally gave up the job.  in giving the readers these facts i earnestly
request them not to credit them to my personal account; for, although
earnestly believed in by a certain class of christian natives here, i
would prefer the responsibility for their truthfulness to rest on the
broad shoulders of tradition rather than on mine.

the turks never call the attention of visitors to these reminders of the
religion of the infidels who built the structure, at such an enormous
outlay of money and labor, little dreaming that it would become one of
the chief glories of the mohammedan world.  but the door-keeper who follows
visitors around never neglects to point out the shape of a human hand
on the wall, too high up to be closely examined, and volunteer the
intelligence that it is the imprint of the hand of the first sultan who
visited the mosque after the occupation of constantinople by the osmanlis.
perhaps, however, the mussulman, in thus discriminating between the
traditions of the greek residents and the alleged hand-mark of the first
sultan, is actuated by a laudable desire to be truthful so far as possible;
for there is nothing improbable about the story of the hand-mark, inasmuch
as a hole chipped in the masonry, an application of cement, and a pressure
of the sultan's hand against it before it hardened, give at once something
for visitors to look at through future centuries and shake their heads
incredulously about.  not the least of the attractions are two monster
wax candles, which, notwithstanding their lighting up at innumerable
fasts and feasts, for the guide does not know how many years past, are
still eight feet long by four in circumference; but more wonderful than
the monster wax candles, the brass tomb of constantine's daughter, set
in the wall over one of the massive doors, the sultan's hand-mark, the
figure of the virgin mary, and the green columns brought from baalbec;
above everything else is the wonderful mosaic-work.  the mighty dome and
the whole vast ceiling are mosaic-work in which tiny squares of blue,
green, and gold crystal are made to work out patterns.  the squares used
are tiny particles having not over a quarter-inch surface; and the amount
of labor and the expense in covering the vast ceiling of this tremendous
structure with incomputable myriads of these small particles fairly
stagger any attempt at comprehension.

an interesting hour can next be spent in the costume museum, where life-
size figures represent the varied and most decidedly picturesque costumes
of the different officials of the ottoman capital in previous ages, the
janizaries, and natives of the different provinces.  some of the head-gear
in vogue at constantinople before the fez were tremendous affairs, but
the fez is certainly a step too far in the opposite direction, being
several degrees more uncomfortable than nothing in the broiling sun; the
fez makes no pretence of shading the eyes, and excludes every particle
of air from the scalp.  the thousand and one columns are in an ancient
greek reservoir that formerly supplied all stamboul with water.  the
columns number but three hundred and thirty-four in reality, but each
column is in three parts, and by stretching the point we have the fanciful
" tbousand-and-one." the reservoir is reached by descending a flight of
stone steps; it is filled in with earth up to the upper half of the
second tier of columns, so that the lower tier is buried altogether.
this filling up was done in the days of the janizaries, as it was found
that those frisky warriors were carrying their well-known theory of
"right being might and the devil take the weakest" to the extent of robbing
unprotected people who ventured to pass this vicinity after dark, and
then consigning them to the dark depths of the deserted reservoir.  the
reservoir is now occupied during the day by a number of jewish silk-weavers,
who work here on account of the dampness and coolness being beneficial
to the silk.  the tomb of mahmoud is next visited on the way to the bazaar.
the several coffins of the sultan mahmoud and his sultana and princesses
are surrounded by massive railings of pure silver; monster wax candles
are standing at the head and foot of each coffin, in curiously wrought
candlesticks of solid silver that must weigh a hundred pounds each at
least; ranged around the room are silver caskets, inlaid with mother-of-pearl,
in which rare illumined copies of the koran are carefully kept, the
attendant who opened one for my inspection using a silk pocket-handkerchief
to turn the leaves.  the stamboul bazaar well deserves its renown, since
there is nothing else of its kind in the whole world to compare with it.
its labyrinth of little stalls and shops if joined together in one
straight line would extend for miles; and a whole day might be spent
quite profitably in wandering around, watching the busy scenes of
bargaining and manufacturing.  here, in this bewildering maze of buying
and selling, the peculiar life of the orient can be seen to perfection;
the "mysterious veiled lady" of the east is seen thronging the narrow
traffic-ways and seated in every stall; water-venders and venders of
carpooses (water-melons) and a score of different eatables are meandering
through.  here, if your guide be an honest fellow, he can pilot you into
stuffy little holes full of antique articles of every description, where
genuine bargains can be picked up; or, if he be dishonest, and in league
with equally dishonest tricksters, whose places are antiquaries only in
name, he can lead you where everything is basest imitation.  in the former
case, if anything is purchased he comes in for a small and not undeserved
commission from the shopkeeper, and in the latter for perhaps as much
as thirty per cent.  i am told that one of these guides, when escorting
a party of tourists with plenty of money to spend and no knowledge
whatever of the real value or genuineness of antique articles, often
makes as much as ten or fifteen pounds sterling a day commission.

on the way from the bazaar we call at the pigeon mosque, so called on
account of being the resort of thousands of pigeons, that have become
quite tame from being constantly fed by visitors and surrounded by human
beings.  a woman has charge of a store of seeds and grain, and visitors
purchase a handful for ten paras and throw to the pigeons, who flock
around fearlessly in the general scramble for the food.  at any hour of
the day mussulman ladies may be seen here feeding the pigeons for the
amusement of their children.  from the pigeon mosque we ascend the saraka
tower, the great watch-tower of stamboul, from the summit of which the
news of a fire in any part of the city is signalled, by suspending huge
frame-work balls covered with canvas from the ends of projecting poles
in the day, and lights at night.  constant watch and ward is kept over
the city below by men snugly housed in quarters near the summit, who,
in addition to their duties as watchmen, turn an honest cherik occasionally
by supplying cups of coffee to visitors.

no fairer site ever greeted human vision than the prospect from the tower
of saraka.  stamboul, galata, pera, and scutari, with every suburban
village and resort for many a mile around, can be seen to perfection
from the commanding height of saraka tower.  the guide can here point out
every building of interest in stamboul-the broad area of roof beneath
which the busy scenes of stamboul bazaar are enacted from day to day,
the great persian khan, the different mosques, the sultan's palaces at
pera, the imperial kiosks up the bosphorus, the old grecian aqueduct,
along which the water for supplying the great reservoir of the thousand
and one columns used to be conducted, the old city walls, and scores of
other interesting objects too numerous to mention here.  on the opposite
hill, across the golden horn, galata watch-tower points skyward above
the mosques and houses of galata and pera.  the two bridges connecting
stamboul and galata are seen thronged with busy traffic; a forest of
masts and spars is ranged all along the golden horn; steamboats are
plying hither and thither across the bosphorus; the american cruiser
quinnebaug rides at anchor opposite the imperial water-side palace; the
blue waters of the sea of marmora and the gulf of ismidt are dotted here
and there with snowy sails or lined with the smoke of steamships; all
combined to make the most lovely panorama imaginable, and to which the
coast-wise hills and more lofty mountains of asia minor in the distance
form a most appropriate background.

>from this vantage-point the guide will not neglect whetting the curiosity
of his charge for more sight-seeing by pointing out everything that he
imagines would be interesting; he points out a hill above scutari, whence,
he says, a splendid view can be had of "all asia minor," and "we could
walk there and back in half a day, or go quicker with horses or donkeys;"
he reminds you that to-morrow is the day for the howling dervishes in
scutari, and tells you that by starting at one we can walk out to the
english cemetery, and return to scutari in time for the howling dervishes
at four o'clock, and manages altogether to get his employer interested
in a programme, which, if carried out, would guarantee him employment
for the next week.  on the way back to galata we visit the tomb of sulieman
i, the most magnificent tomb in stamboul.  here, before the coffins of
sulieman i., sulieman ii, and his brother ahmed, are monster wax candles,
that have stood sentry here for three hundred and fifty years; and the
mosaic dome of the beautiful edifice is studded with what are popularly
believed to be genuine diamonds, that twinkle down on the curiously
gazing visitor like stars from a miniature heaven.  the attendant tells
the guide, in answer to an inquiry from me, that no one living knows
whether they are genuine diamonds or not, for never, since the day it
was finished, over three centuries and a half ago, has anyone been
permitted to go up and examine them.  the edifice was go perfectly and
solidly built in the beginning, that no repairs of any kind have ever
been necessary; and it looks almost like a new building to-day.

not being able to spare the time for visiting all the objects of interest
enumerated by the guide, i elect to see the howling dervishes as the
most interesting among them.  accordingly we take the ferry-boat across
to scutari on thursday afternoon in time to visit the english cemetery
before the dervishes begin their peculiar services.  we pass through one
of the largest mussulman cemeteries of constantinople, a bewildering
area of tombstones beneath a grove of dark cypresses, so crowded and
disorderly that the oldest gravestones seem to have been pushed down,
or on one side, to make room for others of a later generation, and these
again for still others.  in happy comparison to the disordered area of
crowded tombstones in the mohammedan graveyard is the english cemetery,
where the soldiers who died at the scutari hospital during the crimean
war were buried, and the english residents of constantinople now bury
their dead.  the situation of the english cemetery is a charming spot,
on a sloping bluff, washed by the waters of the bosphorus, where the
requiem of the murmuring waves is perpetually sung for the brave fellows
interred there.  an englishman has charge; and after being in turkey a
month it is really quite refreshing to visit this cemetery, and note the
scrupulous neatness of the grounds.  the keeper must be industry personified,
for he scarcely permits a dead leaf to escape his notice; and the four
angels beaming down upon the grounds from the national monument erected
by england, in memory of the crimean heroes, were they real visitors
from the better land, could doubtless give a good account of his
stewardship.

the howling dervishes have already begun to howl as we open the portals
leading into their place of worship by the influence of a cherik placed
in the open palm of a sable eunuch at the door; but it is only the
overture, for it is half an hour later when the interesting part of the
programme begins.  the first hour seems to be devoted to preliminary
meditations and comparatively quiet ceremonies; but the cruel-looking
instruments of self-flagellation hanging on the wall, and a choice and
complete assortment of drums and other noise-producing but unmelodious
instruments, remind the visitor that he is in the presence of a peculiar
people.  sheepskin mats almost cover the floor of the room, which is kept
scrupulously clean, presumably to guard against the worshippers soiling
their lips whenever they kiss the floor, a ceremony which they perform
quite frequently during the first hour; and everyone who presumes to
tread within that holy precinct removes his over-shoes, if he is wearing
any, otherwise he enters in his stockings.  at five o'clock the excitement
begins; thirty or forty men are ranged around one end of the room, bowing
themselves about most violently, and keeping time to the movements of
their bodies with shouts of "allah.  allah." and then branching off into
a howling chorus of mussulman supplications, that, unintelligible as
they are to the infidel ear, are not altogether devoid of melody in the
expression, the turkish language abounding in words in which there is a
world of mellifluousness.  a dancing dervish, who has been patiently
awaiting at the inner gate, now receives a nod of permission from the
priest, and, after laying aside an outer garment, waltzes nimbly into
the room, and straightway begins spinning round like a ballet-dancer
in italian opera, his arms extended, his long skirt forming a complete
circle around him as he revolves, and his eyes fixed with a determined
gaze into vacancy.  among the howlers is a negro, who is six feet three
at least, not in his socks, but in the finest pair of under-shoes in the
room, and whether it be in the ceremony of kissing the floor, knocking
foreheads against the same, kissing the hand of the priest, or in the
howling and bodily contortions, this towering son of ham performs his
part with a grace that brings him conspicuously to the fore in this
respect.  but as the contortions gradually become more-violent, and the
cry of "allah akbar.  allah hai!" degenerates into violent grunts of "
h-o-o-o-o-a-hoo-hoo," the half-exhausted devotees fling aside everything
but a white shroud, and the perspiration fairly streams off them, from
such violent exercise in the hot weather and close atmosphere of the
small room.  the exercises make rapid inroads upon the tall negro's powers
of endurance, and he steps to one side and takes a breathing-spell of
five minutes, after which he resumes his place again, and, in spite of
the ever-increasing violence of both lung and muscular exercise, and the
extra exertion imposed by his great height, he keeps it up heroically
to the end.

for twenty-five minutes by my watch, the one lone dancing dervish - who
appears to be a visitor merely, but is accorded the brotherly privilege
of whirling round in silence while the others howl-spins round and round
like a tireless top, making not the slightest sound, spinning in a long,
persevering, continuous whirl, as though determined to prove himself
holier than the howlers, by spinning longer than they can keep up their
howling - a fair test of fanatical endurance, so to speak.  one cannot help
admiring the religious fervor and determination of purpose that impel
this lone figure silently around on his axis for twenty-five minutes,
at a speed that would upset the equilibrium of anybody but a dancing
dervish in thirty seconds; and there is something really heroic in the
manner in which he at last suddenly stops, and, without uttering a sound
or betraying any sense of dizziness whatever from the exercise, puts on
his coat again and departs in silence, conscious, no doubt, of being a
holier person than all the howlers put together, even though they are
still keeping it up.  as unmistakable signals of distress are involuntarily
hoisted by the violently exercising devotees, and the weaker ones quietly
fall out of line, and the military precision of the twists of body and
bobbing and jerking of head begins to lose something of its regularity,
the six "encouragers," ranged on sheep-skins before the line of howling
men, like non-commissioned officers before a squad of new recruits,
increase their encouraging cries of "allah.  allah akbar" as though fearful
that the din might subside, on account of the several already exhausted
organs of articulation, unless they chimed in more lustily and helped
to swell the volume.

little children now come trooping in, seeking with eager anticipation
the happy privilege of being ranged along the floor like sardines in a
tin box, and having the priest walk along their bodies, stepping from
one to the other along the row, and returning the same way, while two
assistants steady him by holding his hands.  in the case of the smaller
children, the priest considerately steps on their thighs, to avoid
throwing their internal apparatus out of gear; but if the recipient of
his holy attentions is, in his estimation, strong enough to run the risk,
he steps square on their backs, the little things jump up as sprightly
as may be, kiss the priest's hand fervently, and go trooping out of the
door, apparently well pleased with the novel performance.  finally human
nature can endure it no longer, and the performance terminates in a long,
despairing wail of "allah.  allah.  allah!" the exhausted devotees, soaked
wet with perspiration, step forward, and receive what i take to be rather
an inadequate reward for what they have been subjecting themselves to -
viz., the privilege of kissing the priest's already much-kissed hand,
and at 5.45 p.m. the performance is over.  i take my departure in time
to catch the six o'clock boat for galata, well satisfied with the finest
show i ever saw for a cherik.  i have already made mention of there being
many beautiful sea-side places to which constantinopolitans resort on
sundays and holidays, and among them all there is no lovelier spot than
the island of prinkipo, one of the prince's islands group, situated some
twelve miles from constantinople, down the gulf of ismidt.  shelton bey
(colonel shelton), an english gentleman, who superintends the sultan's
cannon-foundry at tophana, and the well-known author of shelton's "
mechanic's guide," owns the finest steam-yacht on the bosphorus, and
three sundays out of the five i remain here, this gentleman and his
excellent lady kindly invite me to visit prinkipo with them for the day.

on the way over we usually race with the regular passenger steamer, and
as the bey's yacht is no plaything for size and speed, we generally
manage to keep close enough to amuse ourselves with the comments on the
beauty and speed of our little craft from the crowded deck of the other
boat.  sometimes a very distinguished person or two is aboard the yacht
with our little company, personages known to the bey, who having arrived
on the passenger-boat, accept invitations for a cruise around the island,
or to dine aboard the yacht as she rides at anchor before the town.  but
the advent of the " americanish velocipediste " and his glistening
machine, a wonderful thing that prinkipo never saw the like of before,
creates a genuine sensation, and becomes the subject of a nine-days'
wonder.  prinkipo is a delightful gossipy island, occupied during the
summer by the families of wealthy constantinopolitans and leading business
men, who go to and fro daily between the little island and the city on
the passenger-boats regularly plying between them, and is visited every
sunday by crowds in search of the health and pleasure afforded by a day's
outing.  while here at constantinople i received by mail from america a
butcher spoke cyclometer, and on the second visit to prinkipo i measured
the road which has been made around half the island; the distance is
four english miles and a fraction.  the road was built by refugees employed
by the sultan during the last russo-turkish war, and is a very good one;
for part of the distance it leads between splendid villas, on the verandas
of which are seen groups of the wealth and beauty of the osmanli capital,
armenians, greeks, and turks - the latter ladies sometimes take the privilege
of dispensing with the yashmak during their visits to the comparative
seclusion of prinkipo villas - with quite a sprinkling of english and
europeans.  the sort of impression made upon the imaginations of prinkipo
young ladies by the bicycle is apparent from the following comment made
by a bevy of them confidentially to shelton bey, and kindly written out
by him, together with the english interpretation thereof.  the prinkipo
ladies' compliment to the first bicycle rider visiting their beautiful
island is: "o bizdan kaydore ghyurulduzug em nezalcettt sadi bir dakika
ulchum ghyuriorus nazaman bir dah backiorus o bittum gitmush." (he glides
noiselessly and gracefully past; we see him only for a moment; when we
look again he is quite gone.) the men are of course less poetical, their
ideas running more to the practical side of the possibilities of the new
ox-rival, and they comment as follows: "onum beyghir hich-bir-shey
yemiore hich-bir-shey ichmiore inch yorumliore ma sheitan gibi ghiti-ore,"
(his horse, he eats nothing, drinks nothing, never gets tired, and goes
like the very devil.) it is but fair to add, however, that any bold
occidental contemplating making a descent on prinkipo with a, "sociable"
with a view to delightful moonlight rides with the fair; authors of
the above poetic contribution will find himself "all at sea" upon, his
arrival, unless he brings a three-seated machine, so that the mamma can
be accommodated with a seat behind, since the daughters of prinkipo
society never wander forth by moonlight, or any other light, unless thus
accompanied, or by some; equally staid and solicitous relative.

for the asiatic tour i have invented a "bicycle tent" - a handy contrivance
by which the bicycle is made to answer the place of tent poles.  the
material used is fine, strong sheeting, that will roll up into a small
space, and to make it thoroughly water-proof, i have dressed it with
boiled linseed oil.  my footgear henceforth will be circassian moccasins,
with the pointed toes sticking up like the prow of a venetian galley.  i
have had a pair made to order by a native shoemaker in galata, and, for
either walking or pedalling, they are ahead of any foot-gear i ever wore;
they are as easy as a three-year-old glove, and last indefinitely, and
for fancifulness in appearance, the shoes of civilization are nowhere.
three days before starting out i receive friendly warnings from both the
english and american consul that turkey in asia is infested with brigands,
the former going the length of saying that if he had the power he would
refuse me permission to meander forth upon so risky an undertaking.  i
have every confidence, however, that the bicycle will prove an effectual
safeguard against any undue familiarity on the part of these frisky
citizens.  since reaching constantinople the papers here have published
accounts of recent exploits accomplished by brigands near eski baba.  i
have little doubt but that more than one brigand was among my highly
interested audiences there on that memorable sunday.

the turkish authorities seem to have made themselves quite familiar with
my intentions, and upon making application for a teskere (turkish passport)
they required me to specify, as far as possible, the precise route i
intend traversing from scutari to ismidt, angora, erzeroum, and beyond,
to the persian frontier.  an english gentleman who has lately travelled
through persia and the caucasus tells me that the persians are quite
agreeable people, their only fault being the one common failing of the
east: a disposition to charge whatever they think it possible to obtain
for anything.  the circassians seem to be the great bugbear in asiatic
turkey.  i am told that once i get beyond the country that these people
range over - who are regarded as a sort of natural and half-privileged
freebooters - i shall be reasonably safe from molestation.  it is a common
thing in constantinople when two men are quarrelling for one to threaten
to give a circassian a couple of medjedis to kill the other.  the circassian
is to turkey what the mythical "bogie" is to england; mothers threaten
undutiful daughters, fathers unruly sons, and everybody their enemies
generally, with the circassian, who, however, unlike the "bogie" of the
english household, is a real material presence, popularly understood to
be ready for any devilment a person may hire him to do.

the bull-dog revolver, under the protecting presence of which i have
travelled thus far, has to be abandoned here at constantinople, having
proved itself quite a wayward weapon since it came from the gunsmith's
hands in vienna, who seemed to have upset the internal mechanism in some
mysterious manner while boring out the chambers a trifle to accommodate
european cartridges.  my experience thus far is that a revolver has been
more ornamental than useful; but i am now about penetrating far different
countries to any i have yet traversed.  plenty of excellently finished
german imitations of the smith & wesson revolver are found in the magazines
of constantinople; but, apart from it being the duty of every englishman
or american to discourage, as far as his power goes, the unscrupulousness
of german manufacturers in placing upon foreign markets what are, as far
as outward appearance goes, the exact counterparts of our own goods, for
half the money, a genuine american revolver is a different weapon from
its would-be imitators, and i hesitate not to pay the price for the
genuine article.  remembering the narrow escape on several occasions of
having the bull-dog confiscated by the turkish gendarmerie, and having
heard, moreover, in constantinople, that the same class of officials in
turkey in asia will most assuredly want to confiscate the smith & wesson
as a matter of private speculation and enterprise, i obtain through the
british consul a teskere giving me special permission to carry a revolver.
subsequent events, however, proved this precaution to be unnecessary,
for a more courteous, obliging, and gentlemanly set of fellows, according
to their enlightenment, i never met any where, than the government
officials of asiatic turkey.  were i to make the simple statement that i
am starting into asia with a pair of knee-breeches that are worth fourteen
english pounds (about sixty-eight dollars) and offer no further explanation,
i should, in all probability, be accused of a high order of prevarication.
nevertheless, such is the fact; for among other subterfuges to outwit
possible brigands, and kindred citizens, i have made cloth-covered buttons
out of turkish liras (eighteen shillings english), and sewed them on in
place of ordinary buttons.  pantaloon buttons at $54 a dozen are a luxury
that my wildest dreams never soared to before, and i am afraid many a
thrifty person will condemn me for extravagance; but the "splendor"
of the orient demands it; and the extreme handiness of being able to cut
off a button, and with it buy provisions enough to load down a mule,
would be all the better appreciated if one had just been released from
the hands of the philistines with nothing but his clothes - and buttons - and
the bicycle.  with these things left to him, one could afford to regard
the whole matter as a joke, expensive, perhaps, but nevertheless a joke
compared with what might have been.  the constantinople papers have
advertised me to start on monday, august 10th, "direct from scutari."
i have received friendly warnings from several constantinople gentlemen,
that a band of brigands, under the leadership of an enterprising chief
named mahmoud pehlivan, operating about thirty miles out of scutari,
have beyond a doubt received intelligence of this fact from spies here
in the city, and, to avoid running direct into the lion's mouth, i decide
to make the start from ismidt, about twenty-five miles beyond their
rendezvous.  a greek gentleman, who is a british subject, a mr. j.  t.
corpi, whom i have met here, fell into the hands of this same gang, and
being known to them as a wealthy gentleman, had to fork over 3,000 ransom;
and he says i would be in great danger of molestation in venturing from
scutari to ismidt after my intention to do so has been published.






chapter x.




the start through asia.

in addition to a cycler's ordinary outfit and the before-mentioned small
wedge tent i provide myself with a few extra spokes, a cake of tire
cement, and an extra tire for the rear wheel.  this latter, together with
twenty yards of small, stout rope, i wrap snugly around the front axle;
the tent and spare underclothing, a box of revolver cartridges, and a
small bottle of sewing-machine oil are consigned to a luggage-carrier
behind; while my writing materials, a few medicines and small sundries
find a repository in my whitehouse sole-leather case on a lamson carrier,
which also accommodates a suit of gossamer rubber.

the result of my study of the various routes through asia is a determination
to push on to teheran, the capital of persia, and there spend the
approaching winter, completing my journey to the pacific next season.

accordingly nine o'clock on monday morning, august 10th, finds me aboard
the little turkish steamer that plies semi-weekly between ismidt and the
ottoman capital, my bicycle, as usual, the centre of a crowd of wondering
orientals.  this ismidt steamer, with its motley crowd of passengers,
presents a scene that upholds with more eloquence than words constantinople's
claim of being the most cosmopolitan city in the world; and a casual
observer, judging only from the evidence aboard the boat, would pronounce
it also the most democratic.  there appears to be no first, second, or
third class; everybody pays the same fare, and everybody wanders at his
own sweet will into every nook and corner of the upper deck, perches
himself on top of the paddle-boxes, loafs on the pilot's bridge, or
reclines among the miscellaneous assortment of freight piled up in a
confused heap on the fore-deck; in short, everybody seems perfectly free
to follow the bent of his inclinations, except to penetrate behind the
scenes of the aftmost deck, where, carefully hidden from the rude gaze
of the male passengers by a canvas partition, the moslem ladies have
their little world of gossip and coffee, and fragrant cigarettes.  every
public conveyance in the orient has this walled-off retreat, in which
osmanli fair ones can remove their yashmaks, smoke cigarettes, and comport
themselves with as much freedom as though in the seclusion of their
apartments at home.

greek and armenian ladies mingle with the main-deck passengers, however,
the picturesque costumes of the former contributing not a little to the
general oriental effect of the scene.  the dress of the armenian ladies
differs but little from western costumes, and their deportment would
wreathe the benign countenance of the lord chamberlain with a serene
smile of approval; but the minds and inclinations of the gentle hellenic
dames seem to run in rather a contrary channel.  singly, in twos, or in
cosey, confidential coteries, arm in arm, they promenade here and there,
saying little to each other or to anybody else.  by the picturesqueness
of their apparel and their seemingly bold demeanor they attract to
themselves more than their just share of attention; but with well-feigned
ignorance of this they divide most of their time and attention between
rolling cigarettes and smoking them.  their heads are bound with jaunty
silk handkerchiefs; they wear rakish-looking short jackets, down the
back of which their luxuriant black hair dangles in two tresses; but the
crowning masterpiece of their costume is that wonderful garment which
is neither petticoat nor pantaloons, and which can be most properly
described as "indescribable," which tends to give the wearer rather an
unfeminine appearance, and is not to be compared with the really sensible
and not unpicturesque nether garment of a turkish lady.  the male companions
of these greek women are not a bit behind them in the matter of gay
colors and startling surprises of the levantine clothier's art, for they
likewise are in all the bravery of holiday attire.  there is quite a
number of them aboard, and they now appear at their best, for they are
going to take part in wedding festivities at one of the little greek
villages that nestle amid the vine-clad slopes along the coast - white
villages, that from the deck of the moving steamer look as though they
have been placed here and there by nature's artistic hand for the sole
purpose of embellishing the lovely green frame-work that surrounds the
blue waters of the ismidt gulf.  several of these merry-makers enliven
the passing hours with music and dancing, to the delight of a numerous
audience, while a second ever-changing but never-dispersing audience is
gathered around the bicycle.  the verbal comments and solomon-like opinions,
given in expressive pantomime, of this latter garrulous gathering
concerning the machine and myself, i can of course but partly understand;
but occasionally some wiseacre suddenly becomes inflated with the idea
that he has succeeded in unravelling the knotty problem, and forthwith
proceeds to explain, for the edification of his fellow-passengers, the
modus operandi of riding it, supplementing his words by the most
extraordinary gestures.  the audience is usually very attentive and highly
interested in these explanations, and may be considerably enlightened
by their self-constituted tutors, whose sole advantage over their auditors,
so far as bicycles are concerned, consists simply in a belief in the
superiority of their own particular powers of penetration.  but to the
only person aboard the steamer who really does know anything at all about
the subject, the chief end of their exposition seems to be gained when
they have duly impressed upon the minds of their hearers that the bicycle
is to ride on, and that it goes at a rate of speed quite beyond the
comprehension of their - the auditors' - minds; "bin, bin, bin. chu, chu,
chu.  haidi, haidi, haidi." being repeated with a vehemence that is
intended to impress upon them little less than flying-dutchman speed.

the deck of a constantinople steamer affords splendid opportunity for
character study, and the ismidt packet is no exception.  nearly every
person aboard has some characteristic, peculiar and distinct from any
of the others.  at intervals of about fifteen minutes a couple of armenians,
bare-footed, bare-legged, and ragged, clamber with much difficulty and
scraping of shins over a large pile of empty chicken-crates to visit one
particular crate.  their collective baggage consists of a thin, half-grown
chicken tied by both feet to a small bag of barley, which is to prepare
it for the useful but inglorious end of all chickendom.  they have
imprisoned their unhappy charge in a crate that is most difficult to get
at.  why they didn't put it in one of the nearer crates, what their object
is in climbing up to visit it so frequently, and why they always go
together, are problems of the knottiest kind.

a far less difficult riddle is the case of a middle-aged man, whose
costume and avocation explain nothing, save that he is not an osmanli.
he is a passenger homeward bound to one of the coast villages, and
he constantly circulates among the crowd with a basket of water-melons,
which he has brought aboard "on spec," to vend among his fellow-passengers,
hoping thereby to gain sufficient to defray the cost of his passage.
seated on whatever they can find to perch upon, near the canvas partition,
all unmoved by the gay and stirring scenes before them, is a group of
mussulman pilgrims from some interior town, returning from a pilgrimage
to stamboul - fine-looking osmanli graybeards, whose haughty reserve not
even the bicycle is able to completely overcome, although it proves more
efficacious in subduing it and waking them out of their habitual
contemplative attitude than anything else aboard.  two of these men are
of magnificent physique; their black eyes, rather full lips, and swarthy
skins betraying arab blood.  in addition to the long daggers and antiquated
pistols so universally worn in the orient, they are armed with fine,
large, pearl-handled revolvers, and they sit cross-legged, smoking
cigarette after cigarette in silent meditation, paying no heed even to
the merry music and the dancing of the greeks.

at jelova, the first village the steamer halts at, a coupleof zaptiehs
come aboard with two prisoners whom they are conveying to ismidt.  these
men are lower-class criminals, and their wretched appearance betrays the
utter absence of hygienic considerations on the part of the turkish
prison authorities; they evidently have had no cause to complain of any
harsh measures for the enforcement of personal cleanliness.  their foot-gear
consists of pieces of rawhide, fastened on with odds and ends of string;
and pieces of coarse sacking tacked on to what were once clothes barely
suffice to cover their nakedness; bare-headed - their bushy hair has not
for months felt the smoothing influence of a comb, and their hands and
faces look as if they had just endured a seven-years' famine of soap and
water.  this latter feature is a sure sign that they are not turks, for
prisoners are most likely allowed full liberty to keep themselves clean,
and a turk would at least have come out into the world with a clean face.

the zaptiehs squat down together and smoke cigarettes, and allow their
charges full liberty to roam wheresoever they will while on board, and
the two prisoners, to all appearances perfectly oblivious of their rags,
filth, and the degradation of their position, mingle freely with the
passengers; and, as they move about, asking and answering questions, i
look in vain among the latter for any sign of the spirit of social
pharisaism that in a western crowd would have kept them at a distance.
both these men have every appearance of being the lowest of criminals -
men capable of any deed in the calendar within their mental and physical
capacities; they may even be members of the very gang i am taking this
steamer to avoid; but nobody seems to either pity or condemn them;
everybody acts toward them precisely as they act toward each other.
perhaps in no other country in the world does this social and moral
apathy obtain among the masses to such a degree as in turkey.

while we lie to for a few minutes to disembark passengers at the village
where the before-mentioned wedding festivities are in progress, four of
the seven imperturbable osmanlis actually arise from the one position
they have occupied unmoved since coming aboard, and follow me to the
foredeck, in order to be present while i explain the workings and mechanism
of the bicycle to some arnienian students of roberts college, who can
speak a certain amount of english.  having listened to my explanations
without understanding a word, and, without condescending to question the
armenians, they survey the machine some minutes in silence and then
return to their former positions, their cigarettes, and their meditations,
paying not the slightest heed to several caique loads of greek merry-makers
who have rowed out to meet the new arrivals, and are paddling around the
steamer, filling the air with music.  finding that there is someone aboard
that can converse with me, the greeks, desirous of seeing the bicycle
in action, and of introducing a novelty into the festivities of the
evening, ask me to come ashore and be their guest until the arrival of
the next ismiclt boat - a matter of three days.  offer declined with thanks,
but not without reluctance, for these greek merry-makings are well worth
seeing.  the ismidt packet, like everything else in turkey, moves at a
snail's pace, and although we got under way in something less than an
hour after the advertised starting-time, which, for turkey, is quite
commendable promptness, and the distance is but fifty-five miles, we
call at a number of villages en route, and it is 6 p.m. when we tie up
at the ismidt wharf.

"five piastres, effendi," says the ticket-collector, as, after waiting
till the crowd has passed the gang-plank, i follow with the bicycle and
hand him my ticket.

"what are the five piastres for." i ask.  for answer, he points' to my
wheel.  "baggage," i explain.

"baggage yoke, cargo," he replies; and i have to pay it.  the fact is,
that, never having seen a bicycle before, he don't know whether it is
cargo or baggage; but whenever a turkish official has no precedent to
follow, he takes care to be on the right side in case there is any money
to be collected; otherwise he is not apt to be so particular.  this is,
however, rather a matter of private concern than of zealousness in the
performance of his official duties; the possibilities of peculation are
ever before him.

while satisfying the claim of the ticket-collector a deck-hand comes
forward and, pointing to the bicycle, blandly asks me for backsheesh.
he asks, not because he has put a finger to the machine, or been asked
to do so, but, being a thoughtful, far-sighted youth, he is looking out
for the future.  the bicycle is something he never saw on his boat before;
but the idea that these things may now become common among the passengers
wanders through his mind, and that obtaining backsheesh on this particular
occasion will establish a precedent that may be very handy hereafter;
so he makes a most respectful salaam, calls me "bey effendi," and
smilingly requests two piastres backsheesh.  after him comes the passport
officer, who, besides the teskeri for myself, demands a special passport
for the machine.  he likewise is in a puzzle (it don't take much, by the
by, to puzzle the brains of a turkish official), because the bicycle is
something he has had no previous dealings with; but as this is a matter
in which finances play no legitimate part - though probably his demand for
a passport is made for no other purpose than that of getting backsheesh - a
vigorous protest, backed up by the unanimous, and most certainly vociferous,
support of a crowd of wharf-loafers, and my fellow-passengers, who,
having disembarked, are waiting patiently for me to come and ride down
the street, either overrules or overawes the officer and secures my
relief.  impatient at consuming a whole day in reaching ismidt, i have
been thinking of taking to the road immediately upon landing, and
continuing till dark, taking my chances of reaching some suitable stopping-
place for the night.  but the good people of ismidt raise their voices
in protest against what they professedly regard as a rash and dangerous
proposition.  as i evince a disposition to override their well-meant
interference and pull out, they hurriedly send for a frenchman, who can
speak sufficient english to make himself intelligible.  speaking for
himself, and acting as interpreter in echoing the words and sentiments
of the others, the frenchman straightway warns me not to start into the
interior so late in the day, and run the risk of getting benighted in
the brush; for "much very bad people, very bad people! are between
ismidt and angora; circassians plenty," he says, adding that the worst
characters are near ismidt, and that the nearer i get to angora the
better i shall find the people.  as by this time the sun is already setting
behind the hills, i conclude that an early start in the morning will,
after all, be the most sensible course.

during the last russo-turkish war thousands of circassian refugees
migrated to this part of asia minor.  having a restless, roving disposition,
that unfits them for the laborious and uneventful life of a husbandman,
many of them remain even to the present day loafers about the villages,
maintaining themselves nobody seems to know how.  the belief appears to
be unanimous, however, that they are capable of any deviltry under the
sun, and that, while their great specialty and favorite occupation is
stealing horses, if this becomes slack or unprofitable, or even for the
sake of a little pleasant variety, these freebooters from the caucasus
have no hesitation about turning highwaymen whenever a tempting occasion
offers.  all sorts of advice about the best way to avoid being robbed is
volunteered by the people of ismidt.  my watch-chain, l.a.w. badge, and
everything that appears of any value, they tell me, must be kept strictly
out of sight, so as not to excite the latent cupidity of such circassians
as i meet on the road or in the villages.  some advocate the plan of
adorning my coat with turkish official buttons, shoulder-straps, and
trappings, to make myself, look like a government officer; others think
it would be best to rig myself up as a full-blown zaptieh, with whom,
of course, neither circassian nor any other guilty person would attempt
to interfere.  to these latter suggestions i point out that, while they
are very good, especially the zaplieh idea, so far as warding off
circassians is concerned, my adoption of a uniform would most certainly
get me into hot water with the military authorities of every town and
village, owing to my ignorance of the vernacular, and cause me no end
of vexatious delay.  to this the quick-witted frenchman replies by at
once offering to go with me to the resident pasha, explain the matter
to him, and get a letter permitting me to wear the uniform; which offer
i gently but firmly decline, being secretly of the opinion that these
excessive precautions are all unnecessary.  from the time i left hungary
i have been warned so persistently of danger ahead, and have so far met
nothing really dangerous, that i am getting sceptical about there being
anything like the risk people seem to think.  without being blind to the
fact that there is a certain amount of danger in travelling alone through
a country where it is the universal custom either to travel in company
or to take a guard, i feel quite confident that the extreme novelty of
my conveyance will make so profound an impression on the asiatic mind
that, even did they know that my buttons are gold coins of the realm,
they would hesitate seriously to molest me.  from past observations among
people seeing the bicycle ridden for the first time, i believe that with
a hundred yards of smooth road it is quite possible for a cycler to ride
his way into the good graces of the worst gang of freebooters in asia.

having decided to remain here over-night, i seek the accommodation of a
rudely comfortable hotel, kept by an armenian, where, at the supper-table,
i am first made acquainted with the asiatic dish called "pillau," that
is destined to form no inconsiderable part of my daily bill of fare for
several weeks.  pillau is a dish that is met - with in one disguise or
another all over asia.  with a foundation of boiled rice, it receives a
variety of other compounds, the nature of which will appear as they enter
into my daily experiences.  in deference to the limited knowledge of each
other's language possessed by myself and the proprietor, i am invited
into the cookhouse and permitted to take a peep at the contents of several
different pots and kettles simmering over a slow fire in a sort of brick
trench, to point out to the waiter such dishes as i think i shall like.
failing to find among the assortment any familiar acquaintances, i try
the pillau, and find it quite palatable, preferring it to anything else
the house affords.

our friend the frenchman is quite delighted at the advent of a bicycle
in ismidt, for in his younger days, he tells me with much enthusiasm,
he used to be somewhat partial to whirling wheels himself; and when he
first came here from france, some eighteen years ago, he actually brought
with him a bone-shaker, with which, for the first summer, he was wont
to surprise the natives.  this relic of by-gone days has been stowed away
among a lot of old traps ever since, all but forgotten; but the appearance
of a mounted wheelman recalls it to memory, and this evening, in honor
of my visit, it is brought once more to light, its past history explained
by its owner, and its merits and demerits as a vehicle in comparison
with my bicycle duly discussed.  the bone-shaker has wheels heavy enough
for a dog-cart; the saddle is nearly all gnawed away by mice, and it
presents altogether so antiquated an appearance that it seems a relic
rather of a past century than of a past decade.  its owner assays to take
a ride on it; but the best he can do is to wabble around a vacant space
in front of the hotel, the awkward motions of the old bone-shaker affording
intense amusement to the crowd.  after supper this chatty and entertaining
gentleman brings his wife, a rotund, motherly-looking person, to see the
bicycle; she is a levantine greek, and besides her own lingua franca,
her husband has improved her education to the extent of a smattering of
rather misleading english.  desiring to be complimentary in return for
my riding back and forth a few times for her special benefit, the lady
comes forward as i dismount and, smiling complacently upon me, remarks,
"how very grateful you ride, monsieur!" and her husband and tutor,
desiring also to say something complimentary, echoes, " much grateful - very."

the greeks seem to be the life and poetry of these sea-coast places on
the ismidt gulf.  my hotel faces the water; and for hours after dark a
half-dozen caique-loads of serenaders are paddling about in front of the
town, making quite an entertaining concert in the silence of the night,
the pleasing effect being heightened by the well-known softening influence
of the water, and not a little enhanced by a display of rockets and roman
candles.  earlier in the evening, while taking a look at ismidt and the
surrounding scenery, in company with a few sociable natives, who point
out beauty-spots in the surrounding landscape with no little enthusiasm,
i am impressed with the extreme loveliness of the situation.  the town
itself, now a place of thirteen thousand inhabitants, is the nicomedia
of the ancients.  it is built in the form of a crescent, facing the sea;
the houses, many of them painted white, are terraced upon the slopes of
the green hills, whose sides and summits are clothed with verdure, and
whose bases are laved by the blue waves of the gulf, which here, at the
upper extremity, narrows to about a mile and a half in width; white
villages dot the green mountain-slopes on the opposite shore, prominent
among them being the armenian town of bahgjadjik, where for a number of
years has been established an american missionary-school, a branch, i
think, of roberts college.  every mile of visible country, whether gently
sloping or more rugged and imposing, is green with luxuriant vegetation,
and the waters of the gulf are of that deep-blue color peculiar to
mountain-locked inlets; the bright green hills, the dancing blue waters,
and the white painted villages combine to make a scene so lovely in the
chastened light of early eventide that, after the bosporus, i think i
never saw a place more beautiful.  besides the loveliness of the situation,
the little mountain-sheltered inlet makes an excellent anchorage for
shipping; and during the late war, at the well-remembered crisis when
the russian armies were bearing down on constantinople and the british
fleet received the famous order to pass through the dardanelles with or
without the sultan's permission, the head-waters of the ismidt gulf
became, for several months, the rendezvous of the ships.






chapter xi.




on through  asia.

early dawn on tuesday morning finds me already astir and groping about
the hotel in search of some of the slumbering employees to let me out.
pocketing a cold lunch in lieu of eating breakfast, i mount and wheel
down the long street leading out of the eastern end of town.  on the way
out i pass a party of caravan-teamsters who have just arrived with a
cargo of mohair from angora; their pack-mules are fairly festooned with
strings of bells of all sizes, from a tiny sleigh-bell to a solemn-voiced
sheet-iron affair the size of a two-gallon jar.  these bells make an awful
din; the men are unpacking the weary animals, shouting both at the mules
and at each other, as if their chief object were to create as much noise
as possible; but as i wheel noiselessly past, they cease their unpacking
and their shouting, as if by common consent, and greet me with that
silent stare of wonder that men might be supposed to accord to an
apparition from another world.  for some few miles a rough macadam road
affords a somewhat choppy but nevertheless ridable surface, and further
inland it develops into a fairly good roadway, where a dismount is
unnecessary for several miles.  the road leads along a depression between
a continuation of the mountain-chains that inclose the ismidt gulf, which
now run parallel with my road on either hand at the distance of a couple
of miles, some of the spurs on the south range rising to quite an imposing
height.  for four miles out of ismidt the country is flat and swampy;
beyond that it changes to higher ground; and the swampy flat, the higher
ground, and the mountain-slopes are all covered with timber and a dense
growth of underbrush, in which wild-fig shrubs and the homely but beautiful
ferns of the english commons, the missouri valley woods, and the california
foot-hills, mingle their respective charms, and hob-nob with scrub-oak,
chestnut, walnut, and scores of others.  the whole face of the country
is covered with this dense thicket, and the first little hamlet i pass
on the road is nearly hidden in it, the roofs of the houses being barely
visible above the green sea of vegetation.  orchards and little patches
of ground that have been cleared and cultivated are hidden entirely, and
one cannot help thinking that if this interminable forest of brushwood
were once to get fairly ablaze, nothing could prevent it from destroying
everything these villagers possess.

a foretaste of what awaits me farther in the interior is obtained even
within the first few hours of the morning, when a couple of horsemen
canter at my heels for miles; they seem delighted beyond measure, and
their solicitude for my health and general welfare is quite affecting.
when i halt to pluck some blackberries, they solemnly pat their stomachs
and shake their heads in chorus, to make me understand that blackberries
are not good things to eat; and by gestures they notify me of bad places
in the road which are yet out of sight ahead.  eude mehanax, now called
khans, occupy little clearings by the roadside, at intervals of a few
miles; and among the habitues congregated there i notice several of the
circassian refugees on whose account friends at ismidt and constantinople
have shown themselves so concerned for my safety.

they are dressed in the long cossack coats of dark cloth peculiar to the
inhabitants of the caucasus; two rows of bone or metal cartridge-cases
adorn their breast, being fitted into flutes or pockets made for them;
they wear either top boots or top bootlegs, and the counterpart of my
own moccasins; and their headdress is a tall black lamb's-wool turban,
similar to the national headgear of the persians.  they are by far the
best-dressed and most respectable-looking men one sees among the groups;
for while the majority of the natives are both ragged and barefooted, i
don't remember ever seeing circassians either.  to all outward appearances
they are the most trustworthy men of them all; but there is really more
deviltry concealed beneath the smiling exterior of one of these homeless
mountaineers from circassia than in a whole village of the less likely-
looking natives here, whose general cutthroat appearance - an effect
produced, more than anything else, by the universal custom of wearing
all the old swords, knives, anil pistols they can get hold of-really
counts for nothing.  in picturesqueness of attire some of these khan
loafers leave nothing to be desired; and although i am this morning
wearing igali's cerulean scarf as a sash, the tri-colored pencil string
of servia around my neck, and a handsome pair of circassian moccasins,
i ain absolutely nowhere by the side of many a native here whose entire
wardrobe wouldn't fetch half a mcdjedie in a galata auction-room.  the
great light of central asian hospitality casts a glimmer even up into
this out-of-the-way northwestern corner of the continent, though it seems
to partake more of the nevada interpretation of the word than farther
in the interior.  thrice during the forenoon i am accosted with the
invitation "mastic? cogniac? coffee." by road-side klian-jees or their
customers who wish me to stop and let them satisfy their consuming
curiosity at my novel bagar (horse), as many of them jokingly allude to
it.  beyond these three beverages and the inevitable nargileh, these
wayside khans provide nothing; vishner syrup (a pleasant extract of the
vishner cherry; a spoonful in a tumbler of water makes a most agreeable
and refreshing sherbet), which is my favorite beverage on the road, being
an inoffensive, non-intoxicating drink, is not in sufficient demand among
the patrons of the khans to justify keeping it in stock.  an ancient
bowlder causeway traverses the route i am following, hut the blocks of
stone composing it have long since become misplaced and scattered about
in confusion, making it impassable for wheeled vehicles; and the natural
dirt-road alongside it is covered with several inches of dust which is
continually being churned up by mule-caravans bringing mohair from angora
and miscellaneous merchandise from ismidt.  camel-caravans make smooth
tracks, but they seldom venture to ismidt at this time of the year, i
am told, on account of the bellicose character of the mosquitoes that
inhabit this particular region; their special mode of attack being to
invade the camels' sensitive nostrils, which drives these patient beasts
of burden to the last verge of distraction, sometimes even worrying them
to death.  stopping for dinner at the village of sabanja, the scenes
familiar in connection with a halt for refreshments in the balkan peninsula
are enacted; though for bland and childlike assurance there is no
comparison between the european turk and his brother in asia minor.  more
than one villager approaches me during the few minutes i am engaged in
eating dinner, and blandly asks me to quit eating and let him see me
ride; one of them, with a view of putting it out of my power to refuse,
supplements his request with a few green apples which no european could
eat without bringing on an attack of cholera morbus, but which asiatics
consume with impunity.  after dinner i request the proprietor to save me
from the madding crowd long enough to round up a few notes, which he
attempts to do by locking me in a room over the stable.  in less than ten
minutes the door is unlocked, and in walks the headman of the village,
making a most solemn and profound salaam as he enters.  he has searched
out a man who fought with the english in the crimea, according to his
- the man's-own explanation, and who knows a few words of frank language
and has brought him along to interpret.  without the slightest hesitation
he asks me to leave off writing and come down and ride, in order that
he may see the performance, and - he continues, artfully - that he may judge
of the comparative merits of a horse and a bicycle.

this peculiar trait of the asiatic character is further illustrated
during the afternoon in the case of a caravan leader whom i meet on an
unridable stretch of road.  "bin! bin!" says this person, as soon as
his mental faculties grasp the idea that the bicycle is something to
ride on.  "mimlcin, deyil; fenna yole; duz yolo lazim " (impossible; bad
road; good road necessary), i reply, airing my limited stock of turkish.
nothing daunted by this answer, the man blandly requests me to turn about
and follow his caravan until ridable road is reached - a good mile - in
order that he may be enlightened.  it is, perhaps, superfluous to add
that, so far as i know, this particular individual's ideas of 'cycling
are as hazy and undefined to-day as they ever were.

the principal occupation of the sabanjans seems to be killing time; or
perhaps waiting for something to turn up.  apple and pear-orchards are
scattered about among the brush, looking utterly neglected; they are old
trees mostly, and were planted by the more enterprising ancestors of the
present owners, who would appear to be altogether unworthy of their
sires, since they evidently do nothing in the way of trimming and pruning,
but merely accept such blessings as unaided nature vouchsafes to bestow
upon them.  moss-grown gravestones are visible here and there amid the
thickets; the graveyards are neither protected by fence nor shorn of
brush; in short, this aggressive undergrowth appears to be altogether
too much for the energies of the sabanjans; it seems to be encroaching
upon them from every direction, ruthlessly pursuing them even to their
very door-sills; like banquo's ghost, it will not down, and the people
have evidently retired discouraged from the contest.  higher up on the
mountain-slopes the underbrush gives place to heavier timber, and small
clearings abound, around which the unsubdued forest stands like a solid
wall of green, the scene reminding one quite forcibly of backwoods
clearings in ohio; and were it not for the ancient appearance of the
sabanja minarets, the old bowlder causeway, and other evidences of
declining years, one might easily imagine himself in a new country instead
of the cradle of our race.

at sabanja the wagon-road terminates, and my way becomes execrable beyond
anything i ever encountered; it leads over a low mountain-pass, following
the track of the ancient roadway, that on the acclivity of the mountain
has been torn up and washed about, and the stone blocks scattered here
and piled up there by the torrents of centuries, until it would seem to
have been the sport and plaything of a hundred kansas cyclones.  bound
about and among this disorganized mass, caravans have picked their way
over the pass from the first dawn of commercial intercourse; following
the same trail year after year, the stepping-places have come to resemble
the steps of a rude stairway.  from the summit of the pass is obtained a
comprehensive view of the verdure-clad valley; here and there white
minarets are seen protruding above the verdant area, like lighthouses
from a green sea; villages dot the lower slopes of the mountains, while
a lake, covering half the width of the valley for a dozen miles, glimmers
in the mid-day sun, making altogether a scene that in some countries
would long since have been immortalized on canvas or in verse.  the descent
is even rougher, if anything, than the western side, but it leads down
into a tiny valley that, if situated near a large city, would resound
with the voices of merry-makers the whole summer long.  the undergrowth
of this morning's observations has entirely disappeared; wide-spreading
chestnut and grand old sycamore trees shade a circumscribed area of
velvety greensward and isolated rocks; a tiny stream, a tributary of the
sackaria, meanders along its rocky bed, and forest-clad mountains tower
almost perpendicularly around the charming little vale save one narrow
outlet to the east.  there is not a human being in sight, nor a sound to
break the silence save the murmuring of the brook, as i fairly clamber
down into this little sylvan retreat; but a wreath of smoke curling above
the trees some distance from the road betrays the presence of man.  the
whole scene vividly calls to mind one of those marvellous mountain-retreats
in which writers of banditti stories are wont to pitch their heroes'
silken tent - no more appropriate rendezvous for a band of story-book
free-booters could well be imagined.

short stretches of ridable mule-paths are found along this valley as i
follow the course of the little stream eastward; they are by no means
continuous, by reason of the eccentric wanderings of the rivulet; but
after climbing the rough pass one feels thankful for even small favors,
and i plod along, now riding, now walking, occasionally passing little
clusters of mud huts and meeting with pack animals en route to ismidt
with the season's shearing of mohair.  "alia franga!" is the greeting i
am now favored with, instead of the "ah, i'anglais." of europe, as i
pass people on the road; and the bicycle is referred to as an araba, the
name the natives give their rude carts, and a name which they seem to
think is quite appropriate for anything with wheels.

following the course of the little tributary for several miles, crossing
and recrossing it a number of times, i finally emerge with it into the
valley of sackaria.  there are some very good roads down this valley,
which is narrow, and in places contracts to but little more than a mere
neck between the mountains.  at one of the narrowest points the mountains
present an almost perpendicular face of rock and here are the remnants
of an ancient stonewall reputed to have been built by the greeks, somewhere
about the twelfth century in anticipation of an invasion of the turks
from the south.  the wall stretches across the valley from mountain to
river, and is quite a massive affair; an archway has been cut through
it for the passage of caravans.  soon after passing through this opening
i am favored with the company of a horseman, who follows me for three
or four miles, and thoughtfully takes upon himself the office of telling
me when to bin and when not to bin, according as he thinks the road
suitable for 'cycling or not, until he discovers that his gratuitous
advice produces no visible effect on my movements, when he desists and
follows along behind in silence like a sensible fellow.  about five o'clock
in the afternoon i cross the sackaria on an old stone bridge, and half
an hour later roll into geiveh, a large village situated in the middle
of a triangular valley about seven miles in width.  my cyclometer shows
a trifle over forty miles from ismidt; it has been a variable forty
miles; i shall never forget the pass over the old causeway, the view of
the sabanja valley from the summit, nor the lovely little retreat on the
eastern side.

trundling through the town in quest of a khan, i am soon surrounded by
a clamorous crowd; and passing the house or office of the mudir or headman
of the place, that person sallies forth, and, after ascertaining the
cause of the commotion, begs me to favor the crowd and himself by riding
round a vacant piece of ground hard by.  after this performance, a
respectable-looking man beckons me to follow him, and he takes me - not
to his own house to be his guest, for geiveh is too near europe for this
sort of thing - to a khan kept by a greek with a mote in one eye, where a
"shake down" on the floor, a cup of coffee or a glass of vishner is
obtainable, and opposite which another greek keeps an eating-house.  there
is no separate kitchen in this latter establishment as in the one at
isrnidt; one room answers for cooking, eating, nargileh-smoking, coffee-
sipping, and gossiping; and while i am eating, a curious crowd watches
my every movement with intense interest.  here, as at ismidt, i am requested
to examine for myself the contents of several pots.  most of them contain
a greasy mixture of chopped meat and tomatoes stewed together, with no
visible difference between them save in the sizes of the pieces of meat;
but one vessel contains pillau, and of this and some inferior red wine
i make my supper.  prices for eatables are ridiculously low; i hand him
a cherik for the supper; he beckons me out of the back door, and there,
with none save ourselves to witness the transaction, he counts me out
two piastres change, which left him ten centa for the supper.  he has
probably been guilty of the awful crime of charging me about three
farthings over the regular price, and was afraid to venture upon so
iniquitous a proceeding in the public room lest the turks should perchance
detect him in cheating an englishman, and revenge the wrong by making
him feed me for nothing.  it rains quite heavily during the night, and
while waiting for it to dry up a little in the morning, the geivehites
voluntarily tender me much advice concerning the state of the road ahead,
being governed in their ideas according to their knowledge of a 'cycler's
mountain-climbing ability.  by a round dozen of men, who penetrate into
my room in a body ere i am fairly dressed, and who, after solemnly
salaaming in chorus, commence delivering themselves of expressive pantomime
and gesticulations, i am led to understand that the road from geiveh to
tereklu is something fearful for a bicycle.  one fat old turk, undertaking
to explain it more fully, after the others have exhausted their knowledge
of sign language, swells himself up like an inflated toad and imitates
the labored respiration of a broken-winded horse in order to duly impress
upon my mind the physical exertion i may expect to put forth in "riding"-he
also paws the air with his right foot-over the mountain-range that looms
up like an impassable barrier three miles east of the town.  the turks
as a nation have the reputation of being solemn-visaged, imperturbable
people, yet one occasionally finds them quite animated and "frenchy"
in their behavior - the bicycle may, however, be in a measure responsible
for this.  the soil around geiveh is a red clay that, after a shower,
clings to the rubber tires of the bicycle as though the mere resemblance
in color tended to establish a bond of sympathy between them that nothing
could overcome, i pass the time until ten o'clock in avoiding the crowd
that has swarmed the khan since early dawn, and has been awaiting with
asiatic patience ever since.  at ten o'clock i win the gratitude of a
thousand hearts by deciding to start, the happy crowd deserting half-smoked
nargilehs, rapidly swallowing tiny cups of scalding-hot coffee in their
anxiety lest i vault into the saddle at the door of the khan and whisk
out of their sight in a moment - an idea that is flitting through the
imaginative mind of more than one turk present, as a natural result of
the stories his wife has heard from his neighbor's wife, whose sister,
from the roof of her house, saw me ride around the vacant space at the
mudir's request yesterday.  the oriental imagination of scores of wondering
villagers has been drawn upon to magnify that modest performance into a
feat that fills the hundreds who didn't see it with the liveliest
anticipations, and a murmuring undercurrent of excitement thrills the
crowd as the word goes round that i am about to start.  a minority of the
people learned yesterday that i wouldn't ride across the stones, water-
ditches, and mud-holes of the village streets, and these at once lead
the way, taking upon themselves the office of conducting me to the road
leading to the kara su pass; while the less enlightened majority press
on behind, the more restless spirits worrying me to ride, those of more
patient disposition maintaining a respectful silence, but wondering why
on earth i am walking.

the road they conduct me to is another of those ancient stone causeways
that traverse this section of asia minor in all directions.  this one and
several others i happen to come across are but about three feet wide,
and were evidently built for military purposes by the more enterprising
people who occupied constantinople and the adjacent country before the
turks-narrow stone pathways built to facilitate the marching of armies
during the rainy season when the natural ground hereabout is all but
impassable.  these stone roads were probably built during the byzantine
occupation.  fairly smooth mule-paths lead along-side this relic of
departed greatness and energy, and the warm sun having dried the surface,
i mount and speed away from the wondering crowd, and in four miles reach
the foot of the kara su pass.  from this spot i can observe a small
caravan, slowly picking its way down the mountain; the animals are
sometimes entirely hidden behind rocks, as they follow the windings and
twistings of the trail down the rugged slope which the old turk this
morning thought would make me puff to climb.

a little stream called the kara su, or black water, comes dancing out
of a rocky avenue near by; and while i am removing my foot-gear to ford
it, i am joined by several herdsmen who are tending flocks of the
celebrated angora goats and the peculiar fat-tailed sheep of the east,
which are grazing on neighboring knolls.  these gentle shepherds are not
overburdened with clothing, their nakedness being but barely covered;
but they wear long sword-knives and old flint-lock, bell-mouthed horse-
pistols that give them a ferocious appearance that seems strangely at
variance with their peaceful occupation.  they gather about me with a
familiarity that impresses me anything but favorably toward them; they
critically examine my clothing from helmet to moccasins, eying my various
belongings wistfully, tapping my leather case, and pinching the rear
package to try and ascertain the nature of its contents.  i gather from
their remarks about "para " (a term used in a general sense for money,
as well as for the small coin of that name), as they regard the leather
case with a covetous eye, that they are inclined to the opinion that it
contains money; and there is no telling the fabulous wealth their untutored
minds are associating with the supposed treasure-chest of a frank who
rides a silver "araba." evidently these fellows have never heard of the
tenth commandment; or, having heard of it, they have failed to read,
mark, learn, and inwardly digest it for the improvement of their moral
natures; for covetousness beams forth from every lineament of their faces
and every motion of their hands.  seeing this, i endeavor to win them
from the moral shackles of their own gloomy minds by pointing out the
beautiful mechanism of my machine; i twirl the pedals and show them how
perfect are the bearings of the rear wheel; i pinch the rubber tire to
show them that it is neither iron nor wood, and call their attention to
the brake, fully expecting in this usually winsome manner to fill them
with gratitude and admiration, and make them forget all about my baggage
and clothes.  but these fellows seem to differ from those of their
countrymen i left but a short time ago; my other effects interest them
far more than the wheel does, and one of them, after wistfully eying my
moccasins, a handsomer pair, perhaps, than he ever saw before, points
ruefully down to his own rude sandals of thong-bound raw-hide, and casts
a look upon his comrades that says far more eloquently than words, "what
a shame that such lovely moccasins should grace the feet of a frank and
an unbeliever - ashes on his head - while a true follower of the prophet
like myself should go about almost barefooted!" there is no mistaking
the natural bent of these gentle shepherds' inclinations, and as, in the
absence of a rusty sword and a seventeenth-century horse pistol, they
doubtless think i am unarmed, my impression from their bearing is that
they would, at least, have tried to frighten me into making them a present
of my moccasins and perhaps a few other things.  in the innocence of their
unsophisticated natures, they wist not of the compact little weapon
reposing beneath my coat that is as superior to their entire armament
as is a modern gunboat to the wooden walls of the last century.  whatever
their intentions may be, however, they are doomed never to be carried
out, for their attention is now attracted by the caravan, whose approach
is heralded by the jingle of a thousand bells.

the next two hours find me engaged in the laborious task of climbing a
mere bridle-path up the rugged mountain slope, along which no wheeled
vehicle has certainly ever been before.  there is in some places barely
room for pack animals to pass between the masses of rocks, and at others,
but a narrow ledge between a perpendicular rock and a sheer precipice.
the steepest portions are worn into rude stone stairways by the feet of
pack animals that toiled over this pass just as they toiled before america
was discovered and have been toiling ever since; and for hundreds of
yards at a stretch i am compelled to push the bicycle ahead, rear wheel
aloft, in the well-known manner of going up-stairs.  while climbing up a
rather awkward place, i meet a lone arab youth, leading his horse by the
bridle, and come near causing a serious accident.  it was at the turning
of a sharp corner that i met this swarthy-faced youth face to face, and
the sudden appearance of what both he and the horse thought was a being
from a far more distant sphere than the western half of our own so
frightened them both that i expected every minute to see them go toppling
over the precipice.  reassuring the boy by speaking a word or two of
turkish, and seeing the impossibility of either passing him or of his
horse being able to turn around, i turn about and retreat a short distance,
to where there is more room.  he is not quite assured of my terrestrial
character even yet; he is too frightened to speak, and he trembles visibly
as he goes past, greeting me with a leer of mingled fear and suspicion;
at the same time making a brave but very sickly effort to ward off any
evil designs i might be meditating against him by a pitiful propitiatory
smile which will haunt my memory for weeks; though i hope by plenty of
exercise to escape an attack of the nightmare.

this is the worst mountain climbing i have done with a bicycle; all the
way across the rockies there is nothing approaching this pass for
steepness; although on foot or horseback it would of course not appear
so formidable.  when part way up, a bank of low hanging clouds come rolling
down to meet me, enveloping the mountain in fog, and bringing on a
disagreeable drizzle which scarcely improves the situation.

five miles from the bottom of the pass and three hours from geiveh i
reach a small postaya-khan, occupied by one zaptieh and the station-keeper,
where i halt for a half hour and get the zaptieh to brew me a cup of
coffee, feeling the need of a, little refreshment after the stiff tugging
of the last two hours.  coffee is the only refreshment obtainable here,
and, though the weather looks anything but propitious, i push ahead
toward a regular roadside khan, which i am told i shall come to at the
distance of another hour - the natives of asia minor know nothing of miles
or kilometres, but reckon the distance from point to point by the number
of hours it usually takes to go on horseback.  reaching this khan at three
o'clock, i call for something to satisfy the cravings of hunger, and am
forthwith confronted with a loaf of black bread, villanously heavy, and
given a preliminary peep into a large jar of a crumbly white substance
as villanously odoriferous as the bread is heavy, and which i think the
proprietor expects me to look upon as cheese.  this native product seems
to be valued by the people here in proportion as it is rancid, being
regarded by them with more than affection when it has reached a degree
of rancidness and odoriferousness that would drive a european - barring
perhaps, a limburger - out of the house.  these two delicacies, and the
inevitable tiny cups of black bitter coffee make up all the edibles the
khan affords; so seeing the absence of any alternative, i order bread
and coffee, prepared to make the most of circumstances.  the proprietor
being a kindly individual, and thinking perhaps that limited means forbid
my indulgence in such luxuries as the substance in the earthenware jar,
in the kindness of his heart toward a lone stranger, scoops out a small
portion with his unwashed hand, puts it in a bowl of water and stirs it
about a little by way of washing it, drains the water off through his
fingers, and places it before me.  while engaged in the discussion of
this delectable meal, a caravan of mules arrives in charge of seven
rough-looking turks, who halt to procure a feed of barley for their
animals, the supplying of which appears to be the chief business of the
klian-jee.  no sooner have these men alighted and ascertained the use of
the bicycle, than i am assailed with the usual importunities to ride for
their further edification.  it would be quite as reasonable to ask a man
to fly as to ride a bicycle anywhere near the khan; but in the innocence
of their hearts and the dulness of their oriental understandings they
think differently.  they regard my objections as the result of a perverse
and contrary disposition, and my explanation of  mimkin deyil" as but
a groundless excuse born of my unwillingness to oblige.  one old gray-beard,
after examining the bicycle, eyes me meditatively for a moment, and then
comes forward with a humorous twinkle in his eye, and pokes me playfully
in the ribs, and makes a peculiar noise with the mouth: " q-u-e-e-k,"
in an effort to tickle me into good-humor and compliance with their
wishes; in addition to which, the artful old dodger, thinking thus to
work on my vanity, calls me "pasha effendi." finding that toward their
entreaties i give but the same reply, one of the younger men coolly
advocates the use of force to coerce me into giving them an exhibition
of my skill on the araba.  as far as i am able to interpret, this bold
visionary's argument is: "behold, we are seven; effendi is only one; we
are good mussulmans - peace be with us - he is but a frank - ashes on his
head- let us make him bin."






chapter xii.




through the angora goat country.

the other members of the caravan company, while equally anxious to see
the performance, and no doubt thinking me quite an unreasonable person,
disapprove of the young man's proposition; and the man-jee severely
reprimands him for talking about resorting to force, and turning to the
others, he lays his forefingers together and says something about franks,
mussulmans, turks, and ingilis; meaning that even if we are franks  and
mussulmans, we are not prevented from being at the same time allies and
brothers.  from the khan the ascent is more gradual, though in places
muddy and disagreeable from the drizzling rain which still falls, and
about 4 p.m.  i arrive at the summit.  the descent is smoother, and shorter
than the western slope, but is even more abrupt; the composition is a
slaty, blue clay, in which the caravans have worn trails so deep in
places that a mule is hidden completely from view.  there is no room for
animals to pass each other in these deep trench-like trails, and were
any to meet, the only possible plan is for the ascending animals to be
backed down until a wider place is reached.  there is little danger of
the larger caravans being thus caught in these " traps for the unwary,"
since each can hear the other's approach and take precautions; but single
horsemen and small parties must sometimes find themselves obliged to
either give or take, in the depths of these queer highways of commerce.
it is quite an awkward task to descend with the bicycle, as for much of
the way the trail is not even wide enough to admit of trundling in the
ordinary manner, and i have to adopt the same tactics in going down as
in coming up the mountain, with the difference, that on the eastern slope
i have to pull back quite as stoutly as i had to push forward on the
western.  in going down i meet a man with three donkeys, but fortunately
i am able to scramble up the bank sufficiently to let him pass.  his
donkeys are loaded with half-ripe grapes, which he is perhaps taking all
the way to constantinople in this slow and laborious manner, and he
offers me some as an inducement for me to ride for his benefit.  some
wheelmen, being possessed of a sensitive nature, would undoubtedly think
they had a right to feel aggrieved or insulted if offered a bunch of
unripe grapes as an inducement to go ahead and break their necks; but
these people here in asia minor are but simple-hearted, overgrown children;
they will go straight to heaven when they die, every one of them.

at six o'clock i roll into tereklu, having found ridable road a mile or
so before reaching town.  after looking at the cyclometer i begin figuring
up the number of days it is likely to take me to reach teheran, if
yesterday and to-day have been expository of the country ahead; forty
and one-third miles yesterday and nineteen and a half to-day, thirty
miles a day-rather slow progress for a wheelman, i mentally conclude;
but, although i would rather ride from " land's end to john o'groat's "
for a task, than bicycle over the ground i have traversed between here
and ismidt, i find the tough work interlarded with a sufficiency of novel
and interesting phases to make the occupation congenial.  upon dismounting
at tereklu, i find myself but little fatigued with the day's exertions,
and with a view to obtaining a little peace and freedom from importunities
to ride after supper, i gratify asiatic curiosity several times before
undertaking to allay the pangs of hunger - a piece of self-denial quite
commendable, even if taken in connection with the idea of self-protection,
when one reflects that i had spent the day in severe exercise, and had
eaten since morning only a piece of bread.

not long after my arrival at tereklu i am introduced to another peculiar
and not unknown phase of the character of these people, one that i have
sometimes read of, but was scarcely prepared to encounter before being
on asian soil three days.  from some of them having received medical
favors from the medicine chest of travellers and missionaries, the
asiatics have come to regard every frank who passes through their country
as a skilful physician, capable of all sorts of wonderful things in the
way of curing their ailments; and immediately after supper i am waited
upon by my first patient, the mulazim of the tereklu zaptiehs.  he is a
tall, pleasant-faced fellow, whom i remember as having been wonderfully
courteous and considerate while i was riding for the people before supper,
and he is suffering with neuralgia in his lower jaw.  he comes and seats
himself beside me, rolls a cigarette in silence, lights it, and hands
it to me, and then, with the confident assurance of a child approaching
its mother to be soothed and cured of some ailment, he requests me to
cure his aching jaw, seemingly having not the slightest doubt of my
ability to afford him instant relief.  i ask him why he don't apply to
the hakim (doctor) of his native town.  he rolls another cigarette, makes
me throw the half-consumed one away, and having thus ingratiated himself
a trifle deeper into my affections, he tells me that the tereklu hakim
is "fenna; " in other words, no good, adding that there is a duz hakim
at gieveh, but gieveh is over the kara su dagh.  at this juncture he seems
to arrive at the conclusion that perhaps i require a good deal of coaxing
and good treatment, and, taking me by the hand, he leads me in that
affectionate, brotherly manner down the street and into a coffee-maw,
and spends the next hour in pressing upon me coffee and cigarettes, and
referring occasionally to his aching jaw.  the poor fellow tries so hard
to make himself agreeable and awaken my sympathies, that i really begin
to feel myself quite an ingrate in not being able to afford him any
relief, and slightly embarrassed by my inability to convince him that
my failure to cure him is not the result of indifference to his sufferings.

casting about for some way of escape without sacrificing his good-will,
and having in mind a box of pills i have brought along, i give him to
understand that i am at the top of the medical profession as a stomach-ache
hakim, but as for the jaw-ache i am, unfortunately, even worse than his
compatriot over the way.  had i attempted to persuade him that i was not
a doctor at all, he would not have believed me; his mind being unable
to grasp the idea of a frank totally unacquainted with the noble aesculapian
art; but he seems quite aware of the existence of specialists in the
profession, and notwithstanding my inability to deal with his particular
affliction, my modest confession of being unexcelled in another branch
of medicine seems to satisfy him.  my profound knowledge of stomachic
disorders and their treatment excuses my ignorance of neuralgic remedies.

there seems to be a larger proportion of superior dwelling-houses in
tereklu than in gieveh, although, to the misguided mind of an unbeliever
from the west, they have cast a sort of a funereal shadow over this
otherwise desirable feature of their town by building their principal
residences around a populous cemetery, which plays the part of a large
central square.  the houses are mostly two-story frame buildings, and the
omnipresent balconies and all the windows are faced with close lattice-work,
so that the osmanli ladies can enjoy the luxury of gazing contemplatively
out on the area of disorderly grave-stones without being subjected to
the prying eyes of passers-by.  in the matter of veiling their faces the
women of these interior towns place no such liberal - not to say coquettish -
interpretation upon the office of the yashmak as do their sisters of the
same religion in and about constantinople.  the ladies of tereklu,
seemingly, have a holy horror of displaying any of their facial charms;
the only possible opportunity offered of seeing anything, is to obtain
an occasional glimpse of the one black eye with which they timidly survey
you through a small opening in the folds of their shroud-like outer
garment, that encases them from head to foot; and even this peeping
window of their souls is frequently hidden behind the impenetrable
yashmak.  mussulman women are the most gossipy and inquisitive creatures
imaginable; a very natural result, i suppose, of having had their feminine
rights divine under constant restraint and suppression by the peculiar
social position women occupy in mohammedan countries.  when i have arrived
in town and am surrounded and hidden from outside view by a solid wall
of men, it is really quite painful to see the women standing in small
groups at a distance trying to make out what all the excitement is about.
nobody seems to have a particle of sympathy for their very natural
inquisitiveness, or even to take any notice of their presence.  it is
quite surprising to see how rapidly the arrival of the frank with the
wonderful araba becomes known among these women from one end of town to
another; in an incredibly short space of time, groups of shrouded forms
begin to appear on the housetops and other vantage-points, craning their
necks to obtain a glimpse of whatever is going on.

in the innocence of an unsophisticated nature, and a feeling of genuine
sympathy for their position, i propose collecting these scattered groups
of neglected females together and giving an exhibition for their especial
benefit, but the men evidently regard the idea of going to any trouble
out of consideration for them as quite ridiculous; indeed, i am inclined
to think they regard it as evidence that i am nothing less than a gay
lothario, who is betraying altogether too much interest in their women;
for the old school osmanli encompasses those hapless mortals about with
a green wall of jealousy, and regards with disapproval, even so much as
a glance in their direction.  while riding on one occasion, this evening,
i noticed one over-inquisitive female become so absorbed in the proceedings
as to quite forget herself, and approach nearer to the crowd than the
tereklu idea of propriety would seem to justify.  in her absent-mindedness,
while watching me ride slowly up and dismount, she allowed her yashmak
to become disarranged and reveal her features.  this awful indiscretion
is instantly detected by an old blue-beard standing by, who eyes the
offender severely, but says nothing; if she is one of his own wives, or
the wife of an intimate friend, the poor lady has perhaps earned for
herself a chastisement with a stick later in the evening.

human nature is pretty much the same in the orient as anywhere else; the
degradation of woman to a position beneath her proper level has borne
its legitimate fruits; the average turkish woman is said to be as coarse
and unchaste in her conversation as the lowest outcasts of occidental
society, and is given to assailing her lord and master, when angry, with
language anything but choice.

it is hardly six o'clock when i issue forth next morning, but there are
at least fifty women congregated in the cemetery, alongside which my
route leads.  during the night they seem to have made up their minds to
grasp the only opportunity of "seeing the elephant" by witnessing my
departure; and as, "when a woman will she will," etc., applies to turkish
ladies as well as to any others, in their laudable determination not to
be disappointed they have been patiently squatting among the gray
tombstones since early dawn.  the roadway is anything but smooth,
nevertheless one could scarce be so dead to all feelings of commiseration
as to remain unmoved by the sight of that patiently waiting crowd of
shrouded females; accordingly i mount and pick my way along the street
and out of town.  modest as is this performance, it is the most marvellous
thing they have seen for many a day; not a sound escapes them as i wheel
by, they remain as silent as though they were the ghostly population of
the graveyard they occupy, for i which, indeed, shrouded as they are in
white from head to foot, they might easily be mistaken by the superstitious.
my road leads over an undulating depression between the higher hills, a
region of small streams, wheat-fields, and irrigating ditches, among
which several trails, leading from tereklu to numerous villages scattered
among the mountains and neighboring small valleys, make it quite difficult
to keep the proper road.  once i wander off my proper course for several
miles; finding out my mistake i determine upon regaining the torbali
trail by a short cut across the stubble-fields and uncultivated knolls
of scrub oak.  this brings me into an acquaintanceship with the shepherds
and husbandmen, and the ways of their savage dogs, that proves more
lively than agreeable.  here and there i find primitive threshing-floors;
they are simply spots of level ground selected in a central position and
made smooth and hard by the combined labors of the several owners of the
adjoining fields, who use them in common.  rain in harvest is very unusual;
therefore the trouble and expense of covering them is considered
unnecessary.  at each of these threshing-centres i find a merry gathering
of villagers, some threshing out the grain, others winnowing it by tossing
it aloft with wooden, flat-pronged forks; the wind blows the lighter
chaff aside, while the grain falls back into the heap.  when the soil is
sandy, the grain is washed in a neighboring stream to take out most of
the grit, and then spread out on sheets, in the sun to dry before being
finally stored away in the granaries.  the threshing is done chiefly by
the boys and women, who ride on the same kind of broad sleigh-runner-shaped
boards described in european turkey.

the sight of my approaching figure is, of course, the signal for a general
suspension of operations, and a wondering as to what sort of being i am.
if i am riding along some well-worn by-trail, the women and younger
people invariably betray their apprehensions of my unusual appearance,
and seldom fail to exhibit a disposition to flee at my approach, but the
conduct of their dogs causes me not a little annoyance.  they have a noble
breed of canines throughout the angora goat country - fine animals, as
large as newfoundlands, with a good deal the appearance of the mastiff;
and they display their hostility to my intrusion by making straight at
me, evidently considering me fair game.  these dogs are invaluable friends,
but as enemies and assailants they are not exactly calculated to win a
'cycler's esteem.  in my unusual appearance they see a strange, undefinable
enemy bearing down toward their friends and owners, arid, like good,
faithful dogs, they hesitate not to commence the attack; sometimes there
is a man among the threshers and winnowers who retains presence of mind
enough to notice the dogs sallying forth to attack me, and to think of
calling them back; but oftener i have to defend myself as best i can,
while the gaping crowd, too dumfounded and overcome at my unaccountable
appearance to think of anything else, simply stare as though expecting
to see me sail up into space out of harm's way, or perform some other
miraculous feat.  my general tactics are to dismount if riding, and
manoeuvre the machine- so as to keep it between myself and my savage
assailant if there be but one; and if more than one, make feints with
it at them alternately, not forgetting to caress them with a handy stone
whenever occasion offers.  there is a certain amount of cowardice about
these animals notwithstanding their size and fierceness; they are afraid
and suspicious of the bicycle as of some dreaded supernatural object;
atnd although i am sometimes fairly at my wit's end to keep them at bay,
i manage to avoid the necessity of shooting any of them.  i have learned
that to kill one of these dogs, no matter how great the provocation,
would certainly get me into serious trouble with the natives, who value
them very highly and consider the wilful killing of one little short of
murder; hence my forbearance.  when i arrive at a threshing-floor, and
it is discovered that i am actually a human being and do not immediately
encompass the destruction of those whose courage has been equal to
awaiting my arrival, the women and children who have edged off to some
distance now approach, quite timidly though, as if not quite certain of
the prudence of trusting their eyesight as to the peaceful nature of my
mission; and the men vie with each other in their eagerness to give me
all desired information about my course; sometimes accompanying me a
considerable distance to make sure of guiding me aright.  but their
contumacious canine friends seem anything but reassured of my character
or willing to suspend hostilities; in spite of the friendly attitude of
their masters and the peacefulness of the occasion generally, they make
furtive dashes through the ranks of the spectators at me as i wheel round
the small circular threshing-floor, and savagely snap at the revolving
wheels.  sometimes, after being held in check until i am out of sight
beyond a knoll, these vindictive and determined assailants will sneak
around through the fields, and, overtaking me unseen, make stealthy
onslaughts upon me from the brush; my only safety is in unremitting
vigilance.  like the dogs of most semi-civilized peoples, they are but
imperfectly trained to obey; and the natives dislike checking them in
their attacks upon anybody, arguing that so doing interferes with the
courage and ferocity of their attack when called upon for a legitimate
occasion.

it is very questionable, to say the least, if inoffensive wayfarers
should be expected to quietly submit to the unprovoked attack of ferocious
animals large enough to tear down a man, merely in view of possibly
checking their ferocity at some other time.  when capering wildly about
in an unequal contest with three or four of these animals, while conscious
of having the means at hand to give them all their quietus, one feels
as though he were at that particular moment doing as the romans do, with
a vengeance; nevertheless, it has to be borne, and i manage to come
through with nothing worse than a rent in the leg of my riding trousers.
finally, after fording several small streams, giving half a dozen
threshing-floor exhibitions, and running the gauntlet of no end of warlike
canines, i reach the lost torbali trail, and, find it running parallel
with a range of hills, intersecting numberless small streams, across
which are sometimes found precarious foot-bridges consisting of a tree-
trunk felled across it from bank to bank, the work of some enterprising
peasant for his own particular benefit rather than the outcome of public
spirit.  occasionally i bowl merrily along stretches of road which nature
and the caravans together have made smooth enough even to justify a
spurt; but like a fleeting dream, this favorable locality passes to the
rearward, and is followed by another mountain-slope whose steep grade
and rough surface reads " trundle only."

they seem the most timid people hereabout i ever saw.  few of them but
show unmistakable signs of being frightened at my approach, even when i
am trundling-the nickel-plate glistening in the sunlight, i think,
inspires them with awe even at a distance - and while climbing this hill
i am the innocent cause of the ignominious flight of a youth riding a
donkey.  while yet two hundred yards away, he reins up and remains
transfixed for one transitory moment, as if making sure that his eyes
are not deceiving him, or that he is really awake, and then hastily turns
tail and bolts across the country, belaboring his long-eared charger
into quite a lively gallop in his wild anxiety to escape from my awe-
inspiring presence; and as he vanishes across a field, he looks back
anxiously to reassure himself that i am not giving chase.  ere kind friends
and thoughtful well-wishers, with all their warnings of danger, are three
days' journey behind, i find myself among people who run away at my
approach.  shortly afterward i observe this bold donkey-rider half a mile
to the left, trying to pass me and gain my rear unobserved.  others whom
i meet this forenoon are more courageous; instead of resorting to flight,
they keep boldly on their general course, simply edging off to a respectful
distance from my road; some even venture to keep the road, taking care
to give me a sufficiently large margin over and above my share of the
way to insure against any possibility of giving offence; while others
will even greet me with a feeble effort to smile, and a timid, hesitating
look, as if undecided whether they are not venturing too far.  sometimes
i stop and ask these lion-hearted specimens whether i am on the right
road, when they give a hurried reply and immediately take themselves
off, as if startled at their own temerity.  these, of course, are lone
individuals, with no companions to bolster up their courage or witness
their cowardice; the conduct of a party is often quite the reverse.
sometimes they seem determined not to let me proceed without riding for
them, whether rocky ridge, sandy depression, or mountain-slope characterizes
our meeting-place, and it requires no small stock of forbearance and
tact to get away from them without bringing on a serious quarrel.  they
take hold of the machine whenever i attempt to leave them, and give me
to understand that nothing but a compliance with their wishes will secure
my release; i have known them even try the effect of a little warlike
demonstration, having vague ideas of gaining their object by intimidation;
and this sort of thing is kept up until their own stock of patience is
exhausted, or until some more reasonable member of the company becomes
at last convinced that it really must be "mimkin deyil, " after all;
whereupon they let me go, ending the whole annoying, and yet really
amusing, performance by giving me the most minute particulars of the
route ahead, and parting in the best of humor.  to lose one's temper on
these occasions, or to attempt to forcibly break away, is quickly
discovered to be the height of folly; they themselves are brimful of
good humor, and from beginning to end their countenances are wreathed
in smiles; although they fairly detain me prisoner the while, they would
never think of attempting any real injury to either myself or the bicycle.
some of the more enterprising even express their determination of trying
to ride the machine themselves; but i always make a firm stand against
any such liberties as this; and, rough, half-civilized fellows though
they often are, armed, and fully understanding the advantage of numbers,
they invariably yield this point when they find me seriously determined
not to allow it.  descending into a narrow valley, i reach a road-side
khan, adjoining a thrifty-looking melon-garden - this latter a welcome
sight, since the day is warm and sultry; and a few minutes' quiet, soulful
communion with a good ripe water-melon, i think to myself, will be just
about the proper caper to indulge in after being worried with dogs,
people, small streams, and unridable hills since six o'clock.  "carpoose
?" i inquire, addressing the proprietor of the khan, who issues forth
from the stable.

" peefci, effendi," he answers, and goes off to the garden for the melon.
smiling sweetly at vacancy, in joyous anticipation of the coming feast
and the soothing influence i feel sure of its exerting upon my feelings,
somewhat ruffled by the many annoyances of the morning, i seek a quiet,
shady corner, thoughtfully loosening my revolver-belt a couple of notches
ere sitting down.  in a minute the khan-jee returns, and hands me a
"cucumber" about the size of a man's forearm.

"that isn't a carpoose; i want a carpoose-a su carpoose." i explain.

"su carpoose, yoke" he replies; and as i have not yet reached that
reckless disregard of possible consequences to which i afterward attain,
i shrink from tempting providence by trying conclusions with the overgrown
and untrustworthy cucumber; so bidding the khan-jee adieu, i wheel off
down the valley.  i find a fair proportion of good road along this valley;
the land is rich, and though but rudely tilled, it produces wonderfully
heavy crops of grain when irrigated.  small villages, surrounded by
neglected-looking orchards and vineyards, abound at frequent intervals.
wherever one finds an orchard, vineyard, or melon-patch, there is also
almost certain to be seen a human being evidently doing nothing but
sauntering about, or perhaps eating an unripe melon.

this naturally creates an unfavorable impression upon a traveller's mind;
it means either that the kleptomaniac tendencies of the people necessitate
standing guard over all portable property, or that the asiatic follows
the practice of hovering around all summer, watching and waiting for
nature to bestow her blessings upon his undeserving head.  along this
valley i meet a turk and his wife bestriding the same diminutive donkey,
the woman riding in front and steering their long-eared craft by the
terror of her tongue in lieu of a bridle.  the fearless lady halts her
steed as i approach, trundling my wheel, the ground being such that
riding is possible but undesirable.  "what is that for, effendi."
inquires the man, who seems to be the more inquisitive of the two.
"why, to bin, of course! don't you see the saddle?" says the woman, without
a moment's hesitation; and she bestows a glance of reproach upon her
worse half for thus betraying his ignorance, twisting her neck round in
order to send the glance straight at his unoffending head.  this woman,
i mentally conclude, is an extraordinary specimen of her race; i never
saw a quicker-witted person anywhere; and i am not at all surprised to
find her proving herself a phenomenon in other things.  when a turkish
female meets a stranger on the road, and more especially a frank, her
first thought and most natural impulse is to make sure that no part of
her features is visible - about other parts of her person she is less
particular.  this remarkable woman, however, flings custom to the winds,
and instead of drawing the ample folds of her abbas about her, uncovers
her face entirely, in order to obtain a better view; and, being unaware
of my limited understanding, she begins discussing bicycle in quite a
chatty manner.  i fancy her poor husband looks a trifle shocked at this
outrageous conduct of the partner of his joys and sorrows; but he remains
quietly and discreetly in the background; whereupon i register a silent
vow never more to be surprised at anything, for that long-suffering and
submissive being, the hen-pecked husband, is evidently not unknown even
in asiatic turkey.

another mountain-pass now has to be climbed; it is only a short distance-
perhaps two miles - but all the way up i am subjected to the disagreeable
experience of having my footsteps dogged by two armed villagers.  there
is nothing significant or exceptional about their being armed, it is
true; but what their object is in stepping almost on my heels for the
whole distance up the acclivity is beyond my comprehension.  uncertain
whether their intentions are honest or not, it is anything but reassuring
to have them following within sword's reach of one's back, especially
when trundling a bicycle up a lonely mountain-trail.  i have no right to
order them back or forward, neither do i care to have them think i
entertain suspicions of their intentions, for in all probability they
are but honest villagers, satisfying their curiosity in their own peculiar
manner, and doubtless deriving additional pleasure from seeing one of
their fellow-mortals laboriously engaged while they leisurely follow.
we all know how soul-satisfying it is for some people to sit around and
watch their fellow-man saw wood.  whenever i halt for a breathing-spell
they do likewise; when i continue on, they promptly take up their line
of march, following as before in silence; and when the summit is reached,
they seat themselves on a rock and watch my progress down the opposite
slope.

a couple of miles down grade brings me to torbali, a place of several
thousand inhabitants with a small covered bazaar and every appearance
of a thriving interior town, as thrift goes in asia minor.  it is high
noon, and i immediately set about finding the wherewithal to make a
substantial meal.  i find that upon arriving at one of these towns, the
best possible disposition to make of the bicycle is to deliver it into
the hands of some respectable turk, request him to preserve it from the
meddlesome crowd, and then pay no further attention to it until ready
to start.  attempting to keep watch over it oneself is sure to result in
a dismal failure, whereas an osmanli gray-beard becomes an ever-willing
custodian, regards its safe-keeping as appealing to his honor, and will
stand guard over it for hours if necessary, keeping the noisy and curious
crowds of his townspeople at a respectful distance "by brandishing a
thick stick at anyone who ventures to approach too near.  these men will
never accept payment for this highly appreciated service, it seems to
appeal to the osmanli's spirit of hospitality; they seem happy as clams
at high tide while gratuitously protecting my property, and i have known
them to unhesitatingly incur the displeasure of their own neighbors by
officiously carrying the bicycle off into an inner room, not even granting
the assembled people the harmless privilege of looking at it from a
distance - for there might be some among the crowd possessed of the fenna
ghuz (evil eye), and rather than have them fix their baleful gaze upon
the important piece of property left under his charge by a stranger, he
chivalrously braves the displeasure of his own people; smiling complacently
at their shouts of disapproval, he triumphantly bears it out of their
sight and from the fell influence of the possible fenna ghuz.  another
strange and seemingly paradoxical phase of these occasions is that when
the crowd is shouting out its noisiest protests against the withdrawal
of the machine from popular inspection, any of the protestors will eagerly
volunteer to help carry the machine inside, should the self-important
personage having it in custody condescend to make the slightest intimation
that such service would be acceptable.  handing over the bicycle, then,
to the safe-keeping of a respectable kahuay-jee (coffee khan employee)
i sally forth in quest of eatables.  the kah vay-jee has it immediately
carried inside and set up on one of the divans, in which elevated position
he graciously permits it to be gazed upon by the people, who swarm into
his khan in such numbers as to make it impossible for him to transact
any business.  "under the guidance of another volunteer, who, besides
acting the part of guide, takes particular care that i get lumping weight,
etc., i proceed to the ett-jees and procure some very good mutton-chops,
and from there to the ekmek-jees for bread.  this latter person straightway
volunteers to cook my chops.  sending to his residence for a tin dish,
some chopped onions and butter, he puts them in his oven, and in a few
minutes sets them before me, browned and buttered.  meanwhile, he has
despatched a youth somewhere on another errand, who now returns and
supplements the savory chops with a small dish of honey in the comb and
some green figs.  seated on the generous-hearted ekmek-jee's dough-board,
i make a dinner good enough for anybody.

while discussing these acceptable viands, i am somewhat startled at
hearing one of the worst "cuss-words " in the english language repeated
several times by one of the two turks engaged in the self-imposed duty
of keeping people out of the place while i am eating - a kindly piece of
courtesy that wins for them my warmest esteem.  the old fellow proves to
be a crimean veteran, and, besides a much-prized medal he brought back
with him, he somehow managed to acquire this discreditable, perhaps, but
nevertheless unmistakable, memento of having at some time or other
campaigned it with "tommy atkins." i try to engage him in conversation,
but find that he doesn't know another solitary word of english.  he simply
repeats the profane expression alluded to in a parrot-like manner without
knowing anything of its meaning; has, in fact, forgotten whether it is
english, french, or italian.  he only knows it as a "frank" expression,
and in that he is perfectly right: it is a frank expression, a very frank
expression indeed.  as if determined to do something agreeable in return
for the gratifying interest i seem to be taking in him on account of
this profanity, he now disappears, and shortly returns with a young man,
who turns out to be a greek, and the only representative of christendom
in torbali.  the old turk introduces him as a "ka-ris-ti-ahn " (christian)
and then, in reply to questioners, explains to the interested on-lookers
that, although an englishman, and, unlike the greeks, friendly to the
turks, i also am a " ka-ris-ti-ahn; " one of those queer specimens of
humanity whose perverse nature prevents them from embracing the religion
of the prophet, and thereby gaining an entrance into the promised land
of the kara ghuz kiz (black-eyed houris).  during this profound exposition
of my merits and demerits, the wondering people stare at me with an
expression on their faces that plainly betrays their inability to
comprehend so queer an individual; they look as if they think me the
oddest specimen they have ever met, and taking into due consideration
my novel mode of conveyance, and that many torbali people never before
saw an englishman, this is probably not far from a correct interpretation
of their thoughts.

unfortunately, the streets and environments of torbali are in a most
wretched condition; to escape sprained ankles it is necessary to walk
with a great deal of caution, and the idea of bicycling through them
is simply absurd.  nevertheless the populace turns out in high glee, and
their expectations run riot as i relieve the kahvay-jee of his faithful
vigil and bring forth my wheel.  they want me to bin in their stuffy
little bazaar, crowded with people and donkeys; mere alley-ways with
scarcely a twenty yard stretch from one angle to another; the surface
is a disorganized mass of holes and stones over which the wary and
hesitative donkey picks his way with the greatest care; and yet the
popular clamor is "bin, bin; bazaar, bazaar."  the people who have been
showing me how courteously and considerately it is possible for turks
to treat a stranger, now seem to have become filled with a determination
not to be convinced by anything i say to the contrary; and one of the
most importunate and headstrong among them sticks his bearded face almost
up against my own placid countenance (i have already learned to wear an
unruffled, martyr-like expression on these howling occasions) and fairly
shrieks out, "bin! bin!" as though determined to hoist me iuto the saddle,
whether or no, by sheer force of his own desire to see me there.  this
person ought to know better, for he wears the green turban of holiness,
proving him to have made a pilgrimage to mecca, but the universal desire
to see the bicycle ridden seems to level all distinctions.  all this
tumult, it must not be forgotten, is carried on in perfect good humor;
but it is, nevertheless, very annoying to have it seem that i am too
boorish to repay their kindness by letting them see me ride; even walking
out of town to avoid gratifying them, as some of them doubtless think.
these little embarrassments are some of the penalties of not knowing
enough of the language to be able to enter into explanations.  learning
that there is a piece of wagon-road immediately outside the town, i
succeed in silencing the clamor to so mo extent by promising to ride
when the araba yole is reached; whereupon hundreds come flocking out of
town, following expectantly at my heels.  consoling myself with the thought
that perhaps i will be able to mount and shake the clamorous multitude
off by a spurt, the promised araba yole is announced; but the fates are
plainly against me to-day, for i find this road leading up a mountain
slope from the very beginning.  the people cluster expectantly around,
while i endeavor to explain that they are doomed to disappointment - that
to be disappointed in their expectations to see the araba ridden is
plainly their kismet, for the hill is too steep to be ridden.  they laugh
knowingly and give me to understand that they are not quite such simpletons
as to think that an araba cannot be ridden along an araba yole.  " this
is an araba yole," they argue, "you are riding an araba; we have seen
even our own clumsily-made arabas go up here time and again, therefore
it is evident that you are not sincere," and they gather closer around
and spend another ten minutes in coaxing.  it is a ridiculous position
to be in; these people use the most endearing terms imaginable; some of
them kiss the bicycle and would get down and kiss my dust-begrimed
moccasins if i would permit it; at coaxing they are the most persevering
people i ever saw.  to. convince them of the impossibility of riding up
the hill i allow a muscular young turk to climb into the saddle and try
to propel himself forward while i hold him up.  this has the desired
effect, and they accompany me farther up the slope to where they fancy
it to be somewhat less steep, a score of all too-willing hands being
extended to assist in trundling the machine.  here again i am subjected
to another interval of coaxing; and this same annoying programme is
carried out several times before i obtain my release.  they are the most
headstrong, persistent people i have yet encountered; the natural pig-
headed disposition of the "unspeakable turk" seems to fairly run riot
in this little valley, which at the point where torbali is situated
contracts to a mere ravine between rugged heights.

for a full mile up the mountain road, and with a patient insistence quite
commendable in itself, they persist in their aggravating attentions;
aggravating, notwithstanding that they remain in the best of humor, and
treat me with the greatest consideration in every other respect, promptly
and severely checking any unruly conduct among the youngsters, which
once or twice reveals itself in the shape of a stone pitched into the
wheel, or some other pleasantry peculiar to the immature turkish mind.
at length one enterprising young man, with wild visions of a flying
wheelman descending the mountain road with lightning-like velocity, comes
prominently to the fore, and unblushingly announces that they have been
bringing me along the wrong road; and, with something akin to exultation
in his gestures, motions for me to turn about and ride back.  had the
others seconded this brilliant idea there was nothing to prevent me from
being misled by the statement; but his conduct is at once condemned; for
though pig-headed, they are honest of heart, and have no idea of resorting
to trickery to gain their object.  it now occurs to me that perhaps if i
turn round and ride down hill a short distance they will see that my
trundling up hill is really a matter of necessity instead of choice, and
thus rid me of their undesirable presence.  hitherto the slope has been
too abrupt to admit of any such thought, but now it becomes more gradual.
as i expected, the proposition is heralded with unanimous shouts of
approval, and i take particular care to stipulate that after this they
are to follow me no farther; any condition is acceptable to them as long
as it includes seeing how the thing is ridden.  it is not without certain
misgivings that i mount and start cautiously down the declivity between
two rows of turbaned and fez-bedecked heads, for i have not yet forgotten
the disagreeable actions of the mob at adrianople in running up behind
and giving the bicycle vigorous forward pushes, a proceeding that would
be not altogether devoid of danger here, for besides the gradient, one
side of the road is a yawning chasm.  these people, however, confine
themselves solely to howling with delight, proving themselves to be well-
meaning and comparatively well-behaved after all.  having performed my
part of the compact, a few of the leading men shake hands, and express
their gratitude and well-wishes; and after calling back several youngsters
who seem unwilling to abide by the agreement forbidding them to follow
any farther, the whole noisy company proceed along footpaths leading
down the cliffs to town, which is in plain view almost immediately below.

the entire distance between torbali and keshtobek, where tomorrow forenoon
i cross over into the vilayet of angora, is through a rough country for
bicycling.  forest-clad mountains, rocky gorges, and rolling hills
characterize the landscape; rocky passes lead over mountains where the
caravans, engaged in the exportation of mohair ever since that valuable
commodity first began to be exported, have worn ditch-like trails through
ridges of solid rock three feet in depth; over the less rocky and
precipitous hills beyond a comprehensive view is obtained of the country
ahead, and these time-honored trails are seen leading in many directions,
ramifying the country like veins of one common system, which are necessarily
drawn together wherever there is but one pass.  parts of these commercial
by-ways are frequently found to be roughly hedged with wild pear and
other hardy shrubs indigenous to the country-the relics of by-gone days,
planted when these now barren hills were cultivated, to protect the
growing crops from depredation.  old mill-stones with depressions in the
centre, formerly used for pounding corn in, and pieces of hewn masonry
are occasionally seen as one traverses these ancient trails, marking the
site of a village in days long past, when cultivation and centres of
industry were more conspicuous features of asia minor than they are to-
day; lone graves and graves in clusters, marked by rude unchiselled
headstones or oblong mounds of bowlders, are frequently observed,
completing the scene of general decay.  while riding along these tortuous
ways, the smooth-worn camel-paths sometimes affording excellent wheeling,
the view ahead is often obstructed by the untrimmed hedges on either
side, and one sometimes almost comes into collision, in turning a bend,
with horsemen, wild-looking, armed formidably in the manner peculiar to
the country, as though they were assassins stealing forth under cover.
occasionally a female bestriding a donkey suddenly appears but twenty
or thirty yards ahead, the narrowness and the crookedness of the hedged-in
trail favoring these abrupt meetings; shrouded perhaps in a white abbas,
and not infrequently riding a white donkey, they seldom fail to inspire
thoughts of ghostly equestriennes gliding silently along these now half-
deserted pathways.  many a hasty but sincere appeal is made to allah by
these frightened ladies as they fancy themselves brought suddenly face
to face with the evil one; more than once this afternoon i overhear that
agonizing appeal for providential aid and protection of which i am the
innocent cause.  the second thought of the lady - as if it occurred to her
that with any portion of her features visible she would be adjudged
unworthy of divine interference in her behalf - is to make sure that her
yashmak is not disarranged, and then comes a mute appeal to her attendant,
if she have one, for some explanation of the strange apparition so
suddenly and unexpectedly confronting them.

in view of the nature of the country and the distance to keshtobek, i
have no idea of being able to reach that place to-night, and when i
arrive at the ruins of an old mud-built khan, at dusk, i conclude to sup
off the memories of my excellent dinner and a piece of bread i have in
my pocket, and avail myself of its shelter for the night.  while eating
my frugal repast, up ride three mule-teers, who, after consulting among
themselves some minutes, finally picket their animals and prepare to
join my company; whether for all night or only to give their animals a
feed of grass, i am unable to say.  anyhow, not liking the idea of spending
the whole night, or any part of it, in these unfrequented hills with
three ruffianly-looking natives, i again take up my line of march along
mountain mule-paths for some three miles farther, when i descend into a
small valley, and it being too dark to undertake the task of pitching
my tent, i roll myself up in it instead.  soothed by the music of a
babbling brook, i am almost asleep, when a glorious meteor shoots athwart
the sky, lighting up the valley with startling vividness for one brief
moment, and then the dusky pall of night descends, and i am gathered
into the arms of morpheus.  toward morning it grows chilly, and i am but
fitfully dozing in the early gray, when i am awakened by the bleating
and the pattering feet of a small sea of angora goats.  starting up, i
discover that i am at that moment the mysterious and interesting subject
of conversation between four goatherds, who have apparently been quietly
surveying my sleeping form for some minutes.  like our covetous friends
beyond the kara su pass, these early morning acquaintances are unlovely
representatives of their profession; their sword-blades are half naked,
the scabbards being rudely fashioned out of two sections of wood, roughly
shaped to the blade, and bound together at top and bottom with twine;
in addition to which are bell-mouthed pistols, half the size of a queen
bess blunderbuss.  this villainous-looking quartette does not make "a
very reassuring picture in the foreground of one's waking moments, but
they are probably the most harmless mortals imaginable; anyhow, after
seeing me astir, they pass onl with their flocks and herds without even
submitting me to the customary catechizing.  the morning light reveals
in my surroundings a most charming little valley, about half a mile wide,
walled in on the south by towering mountains covered with a forest of
pine and cedar, and on the north by low, brush-covered hills; a small
brook dances along the middle, and thin pasturage and scattered clumps
of willow fringe the stream.  three miles down the valley i arrive at a
roadside khan, where i obtain some hard bread that requires soaking in
water to make it eatable, and some wormy raisins; and from this choice
assortment i attempt to fill the aching void of a ravenous appetite;
with what success i leave to the reader's imagination.  here the khan-jee
and another man deliver themselves of one of. those strange requests
peculiar to the asiatic turk.  they pool the contents of their respective
treasuries, making in all perhaps, three medjedis, and, with the simplicity
of children whose minds have not yet dawned upon the crooked ways of a
wicked world, they offer me the money in exchange for my whitehouse
leather case with its contents.  they have not the remotest idea of what
the case contains; but their inquisitiveness apparently overcomes all
other considerations.  perhaps, however, their seemingly innocent way of
offering me the money may be their own peculiar deep scheme of inducing
me to reveal the nature of its contents.  for a short distance down the
valley i find road that is generally ridable, when it contracts to a
mere ravine, and the only road is the bowlder strewn bed of the stream,
which is now nearly dry, but in the spring is evidently a raging torrent.
an hour of this delectable exercise, and i emerge into a region of
undulating hills, among which are scattered wheat-fields and clusters
of mud-hovels which it would be a stretch of courtesy to term villages.
here the poverty of the soil, or of the water-supply, is heralded to
every observant eye by the poverty-stricken appearance of , the villagers.
as i wheel along, i observe that these poor half-naked wretches are
gathering their scant harvest by the laborious process of pulling it up
by the roots, and carrying it to their common threshing-floor on donkeys'
backs.  here, also, i come to a camp of turkish gypsies; they are dark-
skinned, with an abundance of long black hair dangling about their
shoulders, like our indians; the women and larger girls are radiant in
scarlet calico and other high-colored fabrics, and they wear a profusion
of bead necklaces, armlets, anklets, and other ornaments dear to the
semi-savage mind; the younger children are as wild and as innocent of
clothing as their boon companions, the dogs.  the men affect the fez and
general turkish style of dress, with many unorthodox trappings and
embellishments, however; and with their own wild appearance, their high-
colored females, naked youngsters, wolfish-looking dogs, picketed horses,
and smoke-browned tents, they make a scene that, for picturesqueness,
can give odds even to the wigwam-villages of uncle sam's crow scouts,
on the little big horn river, montana territory, which is saying a good
deal.  twelve miles from my last night's rendezvous, i pass through
keshtobek, a village that has evidently seen better days.  the ruins of
a large stone khan take up all the central portion of the place; massive
gateways of hewn stone, ornamented by the sculptor's chisel, are still
standing, eloquent monuments of a more prosperous era.  the unenterprising
descendants of the men who erected this substantial and commodious retreat
for passing caravans and travellers are now content to house themselves
and their families in tumble-down hovels, and to drift aimlessly and
unambitiously along on wretched fare and worse clothes, from the cradle
to the grave.  the keshtobek people seem principally interested to know
why i am travelling without any zaptieh escort; a stranger travelling
through these wooded mountains, without guard or guide, and not being
able to converse with the natives, seems almost beyond their belief.
when they ask me why i have no zaptieh, i tell them i have one, and show
them the smith & wesson.  they seem to regard this as a very witty remark,
and say to each other: "he is right; an english effendi and an american
revolver don't require any zapliehs to take care of them, they are quite
able to look out for themselves." from keshtobek my road leads down
another small valley, and before long i find myself in the angora vilayet,
bowling briskly eastward over a most excellent road; not the mule-paths
of an hour ago, but a broad, well-graded highway, as good, clear into
nalikhan, as the roads of any new england state.  this sudden transition
is not unnaturally productive of some astonishment on my part, and
inquiries at nalikhan result in the information that my supposed graded
wagon-road is nothing less than the bed of a proposed railway, the
preliminary grading for which has been finished between keshtobek and
angora for some time.

this valley seems to be the gateway into a country entirely different
from what i have hitherto traversed.  unlike the forest-crowned mountains
and shrubbery hills of this morning, the mountains towering aloft on
every hand are now entirely destitute of vegetation; but they are in
nowise objectionable to look upon on that account, for they have their
own peculiar features of loveliness.  various colored rocks and clays
enter into their composition; their giant sides are fantastically streaked
and seamed with blue, yellow, green, and red; these variegated masses
encompassing one round about on every side are a glorious sight-they are
more interesting, more imposing, more grand and impressive even than the
piny heights of kodjaili.  many of these mountains bear evidence of mineral
formation, and anywhere in the occident would be the scene of busy
operations.  in constantinople i heard an english mineralist, who has
lived many years in the country, express the belief that there is more
mineral buried in these asia minor hills than in a corresponding area
in any other part of the world; that he knew people who for years have
had their eye on certain localities of unusual promise waiting patiently
for the advantages of mineral development to dawn upon the sluggish mind
of osmanli statesmen.  at present it is useless to attempt prospecting,
for there is no guarantee of security; no sooner is anything of value
discovered than the finder is embarrassed by imperial taxes, local taxes,
backsheesh, and all manner of demands on his resources, often ending in
having everything coolly confiscated by the government; which, like the
dog in the manger, will do nothing with it, and is perfectly contented
and apathetic so long as no one else is reaping any benefit from it.

the general ridableness of this chemin de fer, as the natives have been
taught to call it, proves not to be without certain disadvantages, for
during the afternoon i unwittingly manage to do considerable mischief.
suddenly meeting two horsemen, when bowling at a moderate pace around a
bend, the horse of one takes violent exception to my intrusion, and, in
spite of the excellent horsemanship of his rider, backs down into a small
ravine, both horse and rider coming to grief in some water at the bottom.
fortunately, neither man nor horse sustained any more serious injury
than a few scratches and bruises, though it might easily have resulted
in broken bones.  soon after this affair, another donkey-rider takes to
his heels, or rather to his donkey's heels across country, and his long-
eared and generally sure-footed charger ingloriously comes to earth; but
i feel quite certain that no damage is sustained in this case, for both
steed and rider are instantly on their feet; the bold steeple-chaser
looks wildly and apprehensively toward me, but observing that i am giving
chase, it dawns upon his mind that i am perhaps after all a human being,
whereupon he refrains from further flight.

wheeling down the gentle declivity of a broad, smooth road that almost
deserves the title of boulevard, leading through the vineyards and gardens
of nalikhan's environments, at quite a rattling pace, i startle a quarry
of four dears (deers) robed in white mantles, who, the moment they observe
the strange apparition approaching them at so vengeful a speed, bolt
across a neighboring vineyard like the all-possessed.  the rapidity of
their movements, notwithstanding the impedimenta of their flowing shrouds,
readily suggests the idea of a quarry of dears (deer), but whether they
are pretty dears or not, of course, their yashmaks fail to reveal; but
in return for the beaming smile that lights up our usually solemn-looking
countenance at their ridiculously hasty flight, as a reciprocation pure
and simple, i suppose we ought to give them the benefit of the doubt.

the evening at nalikhan is a comparatively happy occasion; it is friday,
the mussulman sabbath; everybody seems fairly well-dressed for a turkish
interior town; and, more important than all, there is a good, smooth
road on which to satisfy the popular curiosity; on 'this latter fact
depends all the difference between an agreeable and a disagreeable time,
and at nalikhan everything passes off pleasantly for all concerned.  apart
from the novelty of my conveyance, few europeans have ever visited these
interior places under the same conditions as myself.  they have usually
provided themselves beforehand with letters of introduction to the pashas
and mudirs of the villages, who have entertained them as their guests
during their stay.  on the contrary, i have seen fit to provide myself
with none of these way-smoothing missives, and, in consequence of my
linguistic shortcomings, immediately upon reaching a town i have to
surrender myself, as it were, to the intelligence and good-will of the
common people; to their credit be it recorded, i can invariably count
on their not lacking at least the latter qualification.  the little khan
i stop at is, of course, besieged by the usual crowd, but they are a
happy-hearted, contented people, bent on lionizing me the best they know
how; for have they not witnessed my marvellous performance of riding an
araba, a beautiful web-like araba, more beautiful than any makina they
ever saw before, and in a manner that upsets all their previous ideas
of equilibrium.  have i not proved how much i esteem them by riding over
and over again for fresh batches of new arrivals, until the whole
population has seen the performance.  and am i not hobnobbing and making
myself accessible to the people, instead of being exclusive and going
straightway to the pasha's, shutting myself up and permitting none but
a few privileged persons to intrude upon my privacy .  all these things
appeal strongly to the better nature of the imaginative turks, and not
a moment during the whole evening am i suffered to be unconscious of
their great appreciation of it all.  a bountiful supper of scrambled eggs
fried in butter, and then the miilazim of zaptiehs takes me under his
special protection and shows me around the town.  he shows me where but
a few days ago the nalikhan bazaar, with all its multifarious merchandise,
was destroyed by fire, and points out the temporary stalls, among the
black ruins, that have been erected by the pasha for the poor merchants
who, with heavy hearts and doleful countenance, are trying to recuperate
their shattered fortunes.  he calls my attention to two-story wooden
houses and other modest structures, which, in the simplicity of his
asiatic soul, he imagines are objects of interest; and then he takes me
to the headquarters of his men, and sends out for coffee in order to
make me literally his guest.  here, in his office, he calls my attention
to a chromo hanging on the wall, which he says came from stamboul -
stamboul, where the asiatic turk fondly imagines all wonderful things
originate.this chromo is certainly a wonderful thing in its way.  it
represents an english trooper in the late soudan expedition kneeling behind
the shelter of a dead camel, and with a revolver in each hand keeping at
bay a crowd of arab spearmen.  the soldier is badly wounded, but with
smoking revolvers and an evident determination to die hard, he has checked,
and is still checking, the advance of somewhere about ten thousand arab
troops.  no wonder the people of keshtobek thought an englishman and a
revolver quite safe in travelling without zaptiehs; some of them had
probably been to nalikhan and seen this same chromo.

when it grows dark the mulazim takes me to the public coffee-garden,
near the burned bazaar, a place which ia really no garden at all only
some broad, rude benches encircling a round water-tank or fountain, and
which is fenced in with a low, wabbly picket-fence.  seated crossed-legged
on the benches are a score of sober-sided turks, smoking nargilehs and
cigarettes, and sipping coffee; the feeble light dispensed by a lantern
on top of a pole in the centre of the tank makes the darkness of the
"garden" barely visible; a continuous splashing of water, the result of
the overflow from a pipe projecting three feet above the surface, furnishes
the only music; the sole auricular indication of the presence of patrons
is when some customer orders "kahvay" or "nargileh" in a scarcely
audible tone of voice; and this is the turk's idea of an evening's
enjoyment.

returning to the khan, i find it full of happy people looking at the
bicycle; commenting on the wonderful marifet (skill) apparent in its
mechanism, and the no less marvellous marifet required in riding it.
they ask me if i made it myself and hatch-lira ? (how many liras ?) and
then requesting the privilege of looking at my teskeri they find rare
amusement in comparing my personal charms with the description of my
form and features as interpreted by the passport officer in galata.  two
men among them have in some manner picked up a sand from the sea-shore
of the english language.  one of them is a very small sand indeed, the
solitary negative phrase, "no;" nevertheless, during the evening he
inspires the attentive auditors with respect for his linguistic
accomplishments by asking me numerous questions, and then, anticipating
a negative reply, forestalls it himself by querying, "no?" the other
"linguist" has in some unaccountable manner added the ability to say
"good morning " to his other accomplishments; and when about time to
retire, and the crowd reluctantly bestirs itself to depart from the
magnetic presence of the bicycle, i notice an extraordinary degree of
mysterious whispering and suppressed amusement going on among them, and
then they commence filing slowly out of the door with the "linguistic
person" at their head; as that learned individual reaches the threshold
he turns toward we, makes a salaam and says, "good-morning," and everyone
of the company, even down to the irrepressible youngster who was cuffed
a minute ago for venturing to twirl a pedal, and who now forms the rear-
guard of the column, likewise makes a salaam and says, "good-morning."

quilts are provided for me, and i spend the night on the divan of the
khan; a few roving mosquitoes wander in at the open window and sing their
siren songs around my couch, a few entomological specimens sally forth
from their permanent abode in the lining of the quilts to attack me and
disturb my slumbers; but later experience teaches me to regard my slumbers
to-night as comparatively peaceful and undisturbed.  in the early morning
i am awakened by the murmuring voices of visitors gathering to see me
off; coffee is handed to me ere my eyes are fairly open, and the savory
odor of eggs already sizzling in the pan assail my olfactory nerves.  the
khan-jee is an osmanli and a good mussulman, and when ready to depart i
carelessly toss him my purse and motion for him to help himself-a thing
i would not care to do with the keeper of a small tavern in any other
country or of any other nation.  were he entertaining me in a private
capacity he would feel injured at any hint of payment; but being a khan-
jee, he opens the purse and extracts a cherik - twenty cents.






chapter xiii.




bey bazaar, angora, and eastward.

a trundle of half an hour up the steep slopes leading out of another of
those narrow valleys in which all these towns are situated, and then
comes a gentle declivity extending with but little interruption for
several miles, winding in and out among the inequalities of an elevated
table-land.  the mountain-breezes blow cool and exhilarating, and just
before descending into the little charkhan valley i pass some interesting
cliffs of castellated rocks, the sight of which immediately wafts my
memory back across the thousands of miles of land and water to what they
are almost a counterpart of the famous castellated rocks of green river,
wyo.  ter.  another scary youth takes to his heels as i descend into the
valley and halt at the village of charkhan, a mere shapeless cluster of
mud-hovels.  before one of these a ragged agriculturist solemnly presides
over a small heap of what i unfortunately mistake at the time for pumpkins.
i say "unfortunately," because after-knowledge makes it highly probable
that they were the celebrated charhkan musk-melons, famous far and wide
for their exquisite flavor; the variety can be grown elsewhere, but,
strange to say, the peculiar, delicate flavor which makes them so
celebrated is absent when they vegetate anywhere outside this particular
locality.  it is supposed to be owing to some peculiar mineral properties
of the soil.  the charkhan valley is a wild, weird-looking region, looking
as if it were habitually subjected to destructive downpourings of rain,
that have washed the grand old mountains out of all resemblance to
neighboring ranges round about.  they are of a soft, shaly composition,
and are worn by the elements into all manner of queer, fantastic shapes;
this, together with the same variegated colors observed yesterday
afternoon, gives them a distinctive appearance not easily forgotten.
they are " grand, gloomy, and peculiar; " especially are they peculiar.
the soil of the valley itself seems to be drift-mud from the surrounding
hills; a stream furnishes water sufficient to irrigate a number of rice-
fields, whose brilliant emerald hue loses none of its brightness from
being surrounded by a framework of barren hills.

ascending from this interesting locality my road now traverses a dreary,
monotonous district of whitish, sun-blistered hills, water-less and
verdureless for fourteen miles.  the cool, refreshing breezes of early
morning have been dissipated by the growing heat of the sun; the road
continues fairly good, and while riding i am unconscious of oppressive
heat; but the fierce rays of the sun blisters my neck and the backs of
my hands, turning them red and causing the skin to peel off a few days
afterward, besides ruining a section of my gossamer coat exposed on top
of the lamson carrier.  the air is dry and thirst-creating, there is
considerable hill-climbing to be done, and long ere the fourteen miles
are covered i become sufficiently warm and thirsty to have little thought
of anything else but reaching the means of quenching thirst.  away off
in the distance ahead is observed a dark object, whose character is
indistinct through the shimmering radiation from the heated hills, but
which, upon a nearer approach, proves to be a jujube-tree, a welcome
sentinel in those arid regions, beckoning the thirsty traveller to a
never-failing supply of water.  at the jujube-tree i find a most magnificent
fountain, pouring forth at least twenty gallons of delicious cold water
to the minute.  the spring has been walled up and a marble spout inserted,
which gushes forth a round, crystal column, as though endeavoring to
compensate for the prevailing aridness and to apologize to the thirsty
wayfarer for the inhospitableness of its surroundings.  miles away to the
northward, perched high up among the ravines of a sun-baked mountain-spur,
one can see a circumscribed area of luxuriant foliage.  this conspicuous
oasis in the desert marks the source of the beautiful road-side fountain,
which traverses a natural subterranean passage-way between these two
distant points.  these little isolated clumps of waving trees, rearing
their green heads conspicuously above the surrounding barrenness, are
an unerring indication of both water and human habitations.  often one
sees them suddenly when least expected, nestling in a little depression
high up some mountain-slope far away, the little dark-green area looking
almost black in contrast with the whitish color of the hills.  these are
literally "oases in the desert," on a small scale, and although from a
distance no sign of human habitations appeal, since they are but mud-
hovels corresponding in color to the hills themselves, a closer examination
invariably reveals well-worn donkey-trails leading from different
directions to the spot, and perchance a white-turbaned donkey-rider
slowly wending his way along a trail.

the heat becomes almost unbearable; the region of treeless, shelterless
hills continues to characterize my way, and when, at two o'clock p.m.,
i reach the town of bey bazaar, i conclude that the thirty-nine miles
already covered is the limit of discretion to-day, considering the
oppressive heat, and seek the friendly accommodation of a khan.  there i
find that while shelter from the fierce heat of the sun is obtainable,
peace and quiet are altogether out of the question.  bey bazaar is a place
of eight thousand inhabitants, and the khan at once becomes the objective
point of, it seems to me, half the population.  i put the machine up on
a barricaded yattack-divan, and climb up after it; here i am out of the
meddlesome reach of the " madding crowd," but there is no escaping from
the bedlam-like clamor of their voices, and not a few, yielding to their
uncontrollable curiosity, undertake to invade my retreat; these invariably
"skedaddle" respectfully at my request, but new-comers are continually
intruding.  the tumult is quite deafening, and i should certainly not be
surprised to have the khan-jee request me to leave the place, on the
reasonable ground that my presence is, under the circumstances, detrimental
to his interests, since the crush is so great that transacting business
is out of the question.  the khan-jee, however, proves to be a speculative
individual, and quite contrary thoughts are occupying his mind.  his
subordinate, the kahvay-jee, presents himself with mournful countenance
and humble attitude, points with a perplexed air to the surging mass of
fezzes, turbans, and upturned turkish faces, and explains - what needs no
explanation other than the evidence of one's own eyes - that he cannot
transact his business of making coffee.

"this is your khan," i reply; "why not turn them out." "mashallah,
effendi.  i would, but for everyone i turned out, two others would come
in-the sons of burnt fathers." he says, casting a reproachful look down
at the straggling crowd of his fellow-countrymen.

"what do you propose doing, then?" i inquire.  "katch para, effendi,"
he answers, smiling approvingly at his own suggestion.

the enterprising kahvay-jee advocates charging them an admission fee
of five paras (half a cent) each as a measure of protection, both for
himself and me, proposing to make a "divvy" of the proceeds.  naturally
enough the idea of making a farthing show of either myself or the bicycle
is anything but an agreeable proposition, but it is plainly the only way
of protecting the kahvay-jee and his khan from being mobbed all the
afternoon and far into the night by a surging mass of inquisitive people;
so i reluctantly give him permission to do whatever he pleases to protect
himself.  i have no idea of the financial outcome of the speculative khan-
jee's expedient, but the arrangement secures me to some extent from the
rabble, though not to any appreciable extent from being worried.  the
people nearly drive me out of my seven senses with their peculiar ideas
of making themselves agreeable, and honoring me; they offer me cigarettes,
coffee, mastic, cognac, fruit, raw cucumbers, melons, everything, in
fact, but the one thing i should really appreciate - a few minutes quiet,
undisturbed, enjoyment of my own company; this is not to be secured by
locking one's self in a room, nor by any other expedient i have yet tried
in asia.  after examining the bicycle, they want to see my "alla franga"
watch and my revolver; then they want to know how much each thing
costs, and scores of other things that appeal strongly to their excessively
inquisitive natures.

one old fellow, yearning for a closer acquaintance, asks me if i ever
saw the wonderful "chu, chu, chu! chemin defer at stamboul," adding that
he has seen it and intends some day to ride on it; another hands me a
crimean medal, and says he fought against the muscovs with the "ingilis,"
while a third one solemnly introduces himself as a "makinis " (machinist),
fancying, i suppose, that there is some fraternal connection between
himself and me, on account of the bicycle being a makina.

i begin to feel uncomfortably like a curiosity in a dime museum - a
position not exactly congenial to my nature; so, after enduring this
sort of thing for an hour, i appoint the kahvay-jee custodian of the
bicycle and sally forth to meander about the bazaar a while, where i can
at least have the advantage of being able to move about.  upon returning
to the khan, an hour later, i find there a man whom i remember passing
on the road; he was riding a donkey, the road was all that could be
desired, and i swept past him at racing speed, purely on the impulse of
the moment, in order to treat him to the abstract sensation of blank
amazement.  this impromptu action of mine is now bearing its legitimate
fruit, for, surrounded by a most attentive audience, the wonder-struck
donkey-rider is endeavoring, by word and gesture, to impress upon them
some idea of the speed at which i swept past him and vanished round a
bend.  the kahvay-jee now approaches me, puffing his cheeks out like a
penny balloon and jerking his thumb in the direction of the street door.
seeing that i don't quite comprehend the meaning of this mysterious
facial contortion, he whispers confidentially aside, "pasha," and again
goes through the highly interesting performance of puffing out his cheeks
and winking in a knowing manner; he then says-also confidentially and
aside - "lira," winking even more significantly than before.  by all this
theatrical by-play, the kahvay-jee means that the pasha - a man of
extraordinary social, political, and, above all, financial importance - has
expressed a wish to see the bicycle, and is now outside; and the kahvay-jee,
with many significant winks and mysterious hints of " lira," advises me
to take the machine outside and ride it for the pasha's special benefit.
a portion of the street near by is " ridable under difficulties; " so i
conclude to act on the kahvay-jee's suggestion, simply to see what comes
of it.  nothing particular comes of it, whereupon the kahvay-jee and his
patrons all express themselves as disgusted beyond measure because the
pasha failed-to give me a present.  shortly after this i find myself
hobnobbing with a small company of ex-mecca pilgrims, holy personages
with huge green turbans and flowing gowns; one of them is evidently very
holy indeed, almost too holy for human associations one would imagine,
for in addition to his green turban he wears a broad green kammer bund
and a green undergarment; he is in fact very green indeed.  then a crazy
person pushes his way forward and wants me to cure him of his mental
infirmity; at all events i cannot imagine what else he wants; the man
is crazy as a loon, he cannot even give utterance to his own mother-tongue,
but tries to express himself in a series of disjointed grunts beside
which the soul-harrowing efforts of a broken-winded donkey are quite
melodious.  someone has probably told him that i am a hakim, or a wonderful
person on general principles, and the fellow is sufficiently conscious
of his own condition to come forward and endeavor to grunt himself into
my favorable consideration.

later in the evening a couple of young turkish dandies come round to the
khan and favor me with a serenade; one of them twangs a doleful melody
on a small stringed instrument, something like the slavonian tamborica,
and the other one sings a doleful, melancholy song (nearly all songs and
tunes in mohammedan countries seem doleful and melancholy); afterwards
an arab camel-driver joins in with a dance, and furnishes some genuine
amusement with his hip-play and bodily contortions; this would scarcely
be considered dancing from our point of view, but it is according to the
ideas of the east.  the dandies are distinguishable from the common run
of turkish bipeds, like the same species in other countries, by the
fearful and wonderful cut of their garments.  the turkish dandy wears a
tassel to his fez about three times larger than the regulation size, and
he binds it carefully down to the fez with a red and yellow silk
handkerchief; he wears a jaunty-looking short jacket of bright blue
cloth, cut behind so that it reaches but little below his shoulder-blades;
the object of this is apparently to display the whole of the multifold
kammerbund, a wonderful, colored waist-scarf that is wound round and
round the waist many times, and which is held at one end by an assistant,
while the wearer spins round like a dancing dervish, the assistant
advancing gradually as the human bobbin takes up the length.  the dandy
wears knee-breeches corresponding in color to his jacket, woollen stockings
of mingled red and black, and low, slipper-like shoes; he allows his
hair to fall about his eyes a la negligee, and affects a reckless, love-
lorn air.

the last party of sight-seers for the day call around near midnight,
some time after i have retired to sleep; they awaken me with their
garrulous observations concerning the bicycle, which they are critically
examining close to my head with a classic lamp; but i readily forgive
them their nocturnal intrusion, since they awaken me to the first
opportunity of hearing women wailing for the dead.  a dozen or so of women
are wailing forth their lamentations in the silent night but a short
distance from the khan; i can look out of a small opening in the wall
near my shake-down, and see them moving about the house and premises by
the flickering glare of torches.  i could never have believed the female
form divine capable of producing such doleful, unearthly music; but there
is no telling what these shrouded forms are really capable of doing,
since the opportunity of passing one's judgment upon their accomplishments
is confined solely to an occasional glimpse of a languishing eye.  the
kahvay-jee, who is acting the part of explanatory lecturer to these
nocturnal visitors, explains the meaning of the wailing by pantomimically
describing a corpse, and then goes on to explain that the smallest
imaginable proportion of the lamentations that are making night hideous
is genuine grief for the departed, most of the uproar being made by a
body of professional mourners hired for the occasion.  when i awake in
the morning the unearthly wailing is still going vigorously forward,
from which i infer they have been keeping it up all night.  though gradually
becoming inured to all sorts of strange scenes and customs, the united
wailing and lamentations of a houseful of women, awakening the echoes
of the silent night, savor too much of things supernatural and unearthly
not to jar unpleasantly on the senses; the custom is, however, on the
eve of being relegated to the musty past by the ottoman government.

in the larger cities where there are corpses to be wailed over every
night, it has been found so objectionable to the expanding intellects
of the more enlightened turks that it has been prohibited as a public
nuisance, and these days it is only in such conservative interior towns
as bey bazaar that the custom still obtains.  when about starting early
on the following morning the khanjee begs me to be seated, and then
several men who have been waiting around since before daybreak vanish
hastily through the door-way; in a few minutes i am favored with a small
company of leading citizens who, having for various reasons failed to
swell yesterday's throng, have taken the precaution to post these
messengers to watch my movements and report when i am ready to depart.
our grunting patient, the crazy man, likewise reappears upon the scene
of my departure from the khan, and, in company with a small but eminently
respectable following, accompanies me to the brow of a bluffy hill leading
out of the depression in which bey bazaar snugly nestles.  on the way up
he constantly gives utterance to his feelings in guttural gruntings that
make last night's lamentations seem quite earthly after all in comparison;
and when the summit is reached, and i mount and glide noiselessly away
down a gentle declivity, he uses his vocal organs in a manner that simply
defies chirographical description or any known comparison; it is the
despairing howl of a semi-lunatic at witnessing my departure without
having exercised my supposed extraordinary powers in some miraculous
manner in his behalf.  the road continues as an artificial highway, but
is not continuously ridable, owing to the rocky nature of the material
used in its construction and the absence of vehicular traffic to wear
it smooth; but it is highly acceptable in the main.  from bey bazaar
eastward it leads for several miles along a stony valley, and then through
a region that differs little from yesterday's barren hills in general
appearance, but which has the redeeming feature of being traversed here
and there by deep canons or gorges, along which meander tiny streams,
and whose wider spaces are areas of remarkably fertile soil.  while
wheeling merrily along the valley road i am favored with a "peace-offering"
of a splendid bunch of grapes from a bold vintager en route, to bey
bazaar with a grape-laden donkey.  when within a few hundred yards the
man evinces unmistakable signs of uneasiness concerning my character,
and would probably follow the bent of his inclinations and ingloriously
flee the field, but his donkey is too heavily laden to accompany him:
he looks apprehensively at my rapidly approaching figure, and then, as
if a happy thought suddenly occurs to him, he quickly takes the finest
bunch of grapes ready to hand and holds them, out toward me while i am
yet a good fifty yards away.  the grapes are luscious, and the bunch
weighs fully an oke, but i should feel uncomfortably like a highwayman,
guilty of intimidating the man out of his property, were i to accept
them in the spirit in which they are offered; as it is, the honest fellow
will hardly fall to trembling in his tracks should he at any future time
again descry the centaur-like form of a mounted wheelman approaching him
in the distance.

later in the forenoon i descend into a canon-like valley where, among a
few scattering vineyards and jujube-trees, nestles ayash, a place which
disputes with the neighboring village of istanos the honor of being the
theatre of alexander the great's celebrated exploit of cutting the gordian
knot that disentangled the harness of the phrygian king.  ayash is to be
congratulated upon having its historical reminiscence to recommend it
to the notice of the outer world, since it has little to attract attention
nowadays; it is merely the shapeless jumble of inferior dwellings that
characterize the average turkish village.  as i trundle through the
crooked, ill-paved alley-way that, out of respect to the historical
association referred to, may be called its business thoroughfare, with
forethought of the near approach of noon i obtain some pears, and hand
an ekmek-jee a coin for some bread; he passes over a tough flat cake,
abundantly sufficient for my purpose, together with the change.  a zaptieh,
looking on, observes that the man has retained a whole half-penny for
the bread, and orders him to fork over another cake; i refuse to take
it up, whereupon the zaptieh fulfils his ideas of justice by ordering
the ekmek-jae to give it to a ragged youth among the spectators.

continuing on my way i am next halted by a young man of the better class,
who, together with the zaptieh, endeavors to prevail upon me to stop,
going through the pantomime of writing and reading, to express some idea
that our mutual ignorance of each other's language prevents being expressed
in words.  the result is a rather curious intermezzo.  thinking they want
to examine my teskeri merely to gratify their idle curiosity, i refuse
to be thus bothered, and, dismissing them quite brusquely, hurry along
over the rough cobble-stones in hopes of reaching ridable ground and
escaping from the place ere the inevitable "madding crowd" become
generally aware of my arrival.  the young man disappears, while the zaptieh
trots smilingly but determinedly by my side, several times endeavoring
to coax me into making a halt; which is, however, promptly interpreted
by myself into a paternal plea on behalf of the villagers - a desire to
have me stop until they could be generally notified and collected - the
very thing i am hurrying along to avoid, i am already clear of the village
and trundling up the inevitable acclivity, the zaptieh and a small
gathering still doggedly hanging on, when the young man reappears,
hurriedly approaching from the rear, followed by half the village.  the
zaptieh pats me on the shoulder and points back with a triumphant smile;
thinking he is referring to the rabble, i am rather inclined to be angry
with him and chide him for dogging my footsteps, when i observe the young
man waving aloft a letter, and at once understand that i have been guilty
of an ungenerous misinterpretation of their determined attentions.  the
letter is from mr. binns, an english gentleman at angora, engaged in the
exportation of mohair, and contains an invitation to become his guest
while at angora.  a well-deserved backsheesh to the good-natured zaptieh
and a penitential shake of the young man's hand silence the self-accusations
of a guilty conscience, and, after riding a short distance down the hill
for the satisfaction of the people, i continue on my way, trundling up
the varying gradations of a general acclivity for two miles.  away up the
road ahead i now observe a number of queer, shapeless objects, moving
about on the roadway, apparently descending the hill, and resembling
nothing so much as animated clumps of brushwood.  upon a closer approach
they turn out to be not so very far removed from this conception; they
are a company of poor ayash peasant-women, each carrying a bundle of
camel-thorn shrubs several times larger than herself, which they have
been scouring the neighboring hills all morning to obtain for fuel.  this
camel-thorn is a light, spriggy shrub, so that the size of their burthens
is large in proportion to its weight.  instead of being borne on the head,
they are carried in a way that forms a complete bushy background, against
which the shrouded form of the woman is undistinguishable a few hundred
yards away.  instead of keeping a straightforward course, the women seem
to be doing an unnecessary amount of erratic wandering about over the
road, which, until quite near, gives them the queer appearance of animated
clumps of brush dodging about among each other.  i ask them whether there
is water ahead; they look frightened and hurry along faster, but one
brave soul turns partly round and points mutely in the direction i am
going.  two miles of good, ridable road now brings me to the spring, which
is situated near a two-acre swamp of rank sword-grass and bulrushes six
feet high and of almost inpenetrable thickness, which looks decidedly
refreshing in its setting of barren, gray hills; and i eat my noon-tide
meal of bread and pears to the cheery music of a thousand swamp-frog
bands which commence croaking at my approach, and never cease for a
moment to twang their tuneful lyre until i depart.  the tortuous windings
of the chemin de fer finally bring me to a cul-de-sac in the hills,
terminating on the summit of a ridge overlooking a broad plain; and a
horseman i meet informs me that i am now mid way between bey bazaar and
angora.  while ascending this ridge i become thoroughly convinced of what
has frequently occurred to me between here and nalikhan - that if the road
i am traversing is, as the people keep calling it, a chemin de fer, then
the engineer who graded it must have been a youth of tender age, and
inexperienced in railway matters, to imagine that trains can ever round
his curve or climb his grades.  there is something about this broad,
artificial highway, and the tremendous amount of labor that has been
expended upon it, when compared with the glaring poverty of the country
it traverses, together with the wellnigh total absence of wheeled vehicles,
that seem to preclude the possibility of its having been made for a
wagon-road; and yet, notwithstanding the belief of the natives, it is
evident that it can never be the road-bed of a railway.  we must inquire
about it at angora.

descending into the angora plain, i enjoy the luxury of a continuous
coast for nearly a mile, over a road that is simply perfect for the
occasion, after which comes the less desirable performance of ploughing
through a stretch of loose sand and gravel.  while engaged in this latter
occupation i overtake a zaptieh, also en route to angora, who is letting
his horse crawl leisurely along while he concentrates his energies upon
a water-melon, evidently the spoils of a recent visitation to a melon-garden
somewhere not far off; he hands me a portion of the booty, and then
requests me to bin, and keeps on requesting me to bin at regular three-
minute intervals for the next half-hour.  at the end of that time the
loose gravel terminates, and i find myself on a level and reasonably
smooth dirt road, making a shorter cut across the plain to angora than
the chin de fer.  the zaptieh is, of course, delighted at seeing me thus
mount, and not doubting but that i will appreciate his company, gives
me to understand that he will ride alongside to angora.  for nearly two
miles that sanguine but unsuspecting minion of the turkish government
spurs his noble steed alongside the bicycle in spite of my determined
pedalling to shake him off; but the road improves; faster spins the
whirling wheels; the zaptieh begins to lag behind a little, though still
spurring his panting horse into keeping reasonably close behind; a bend
now occurs in the road, and an intervening knoll hides iis from each
other; i put on more steam, and at the same time the zaptieh evidently
gives it up and relapses into his normal crawling pace, for when three
miles or thereabout arc covered i look back and perceive him leisurely
heaving in sight from behind the knoll.

part way across the plain i arrive at a fountain and make a short halt,
for the day is unpleasantly warm, and the dirt-road is covered with dust;
the government postaya araba is also halting here to rest and refresh
the horses.  i have not failed to notice the proneness of asiatics to
base their conclusions entirely on a person's apparel and general outward
appearance, for the seeming incongruity of my "ingilis" helmet and the
circassian moccasins has puzzled them not a little on more than one
occasion.  and now one wiseacre among this party at the road-side fountain
stubbornly asserts that i cannot possibly be an englishman because of
my wearing a mustache without side whiskers-a feature that seems to have
impressed upon his enlightened mind the unalterable conviction that i
am an "austrian," why an austrian any more than a frenchman or an
inhabitant of the moon, i wonder ? and wondering, wonder in vain.  five
p.m., august 16,1885, finds me seated on a rude stone slab, one of those
ancient tombstones whose serried ranks constitute the suburban scenery
of angora, ruefully disburdening my nether garments of mud and water,
the results of a slight miscalculation of my abilities at leaping
irrigating ditches with the bicycle for a vaulting-pole.  while engaged
in this absorbing occupation several inquisitives mysteriously collect
from somewhere, as they invariably do whenever i happen to halt for a
minute, and following the instructions of the ayash letter i inquire the
way to the "ingilisin adam" (englishman's man).  they pilot me through
a number of narrow, ill-paved streets leading up the sloping hill which
angora occupies - a situation that gives the supposed ancient capital of
galatia a striking appearance from a distance - and into the premises of
an armenian whom i find able to make himself intelligible in english,
if allowed several minutes undisturbed possession of his own faculties
of recollection between each word - the gentleman is slow but not quite
sure.  from him i learn that mr. binns and family reside during the summer
months at a vineyard five miles out, and that mr. binns will not be in
town before to-morrow morning; also that, "you are welcome to the humble
hospitality of our poor family."

this latter way of expressing it is a revelation to me, and the leaden-heeled
and labored utterance, together with the general bearing of my volunteer
host, is not less striking; if meekness, lowliness, and humbleness,
permeating a person's every look, word, and action, constitute worthiness,
then is our armenian friend beyond a doubt the worthiest of men.  laboring
under the impression that he is mr. binns' "ingilisin adam," i have no
hesitation about accepting his proffered hospitality for the night; and
storing the bicycle away, i proceed to make myself quite at home, in
that easy manner peculiar to one accustomed to constant change.  later
in the evening imagine my astonishment at learning that i have thus
nonchalantly quartered myself, so to speak, not on mr. binns' man, but
on an armenian pastor who has acquired his slight acquaintance with my
own language from being connected with the american mission having
headquarters at kaisarieh.  all the evening long, noisy crowds have been
besieging the pastorate, worrying the poor man nearly out of his senses
on my account; and what makes matters more annoying and lamentable, i
learn afterward that his wife has departed this life but a short time
ago, and the bereaved pastor is still bowed down with sorrow at the
affliction - i feel like kicking myself unceremoniously out of his house.
following the asiatic custom of welcoming a stranger, and influenced,
we may reasonably suppose, as much by their eagerness to satisfy their
consuming curiosity as anything else, the people come flocking in swarms
to the pastorate again next morning, filling the house and grounds to
overflowing, and endeavoring to find out all about me and my unheard - of
mode of travelling, by questioning the poor pastor nearly to distraction.
that excellent man's thoughts seem to run entirely on missionaries and
mission enterprises; so much so, in fact, that several negative assertions
from me fail to entirely disabuse his mind of an idea that i am in some
way connected with the work of spreading the gospel in asia minor; and
coming into the room where i am engaged in the interesting occupation
of returning the salaams and inquisitive gaze of fifty ceremonious
visitors, in slow, measured words he asks, "have you any words for these
people?" as if quite expecting to see me rise up and solemnly call upon
the assembled mussulmans, greeks, and armenians to forsake the religion
of the false prophet in the one case, and mend the error of their ways
in the other.  i know well enough what they all want, though, and dismiss
them in a highly satisfactory manner by promising them that they shall
all have an opportunity of seeing the bicycle ridden before i leave
angora.

about ten o'clock mr. binns arrives, and is highly amused at the ludicrous
mistake that brought me to the armenian pastor's instead of to his man,
with whom he had left instructions concerning me, should i arrive after
his departure in the evening for the vineyard; in return he has an amusing
story to tell of the people waylaying him on his way to his office,
telling him that an englishman had arrived with a wonderful araba, which
he had immediately locked up in a dark room and would allow nobody to
look at it, and begging him to ask me if they might come and see it.  we
spend the remainder of the forenoon looking over the town and the bazaar,
mr. binus kindly announcing himself as at my service for the day, and
seemingly bent on pointing out everything of interest.  one of the most
curious sights, and one that is peculiar to angora, owing to its situation
on a hill where little or no water is obtainable, is the bewildering
swarms of su-katirs (water donkeys) engaged in the transportation of
that important necessary up into the city from a stream that flows near
the base of the hill.  these unhappy animals do nothing from one end of
their working lives to the other but toil, with almost machine-like
regularity and uneventfulness, up the crooked, stony streets with a dozen
large earthen-ware jars of water, and down again with the empty jars.
the donkey is sandwiched between two long wooden troughs suspended to a
rude pack-saddle, and each trough accommodates six jars, each holding
about two gallons of water; one can readily imagine the swarms of these
novel and primitive conveyances required to supply a population of thirty-
five thousand people.  upon inquiring what they do in case of a fire, i
learn that they don't even think of fighting the devouring element with
its natural enemy, but, collecting on the adjoining roofs, they smother
the flames by pelting the burning building with the soft, crumbly bricks
of which angora is chiefly built; a house on fire, with a swarm of half-
naked natives on the neighboring housetops bombarding the leaping flames
with bricks, would certainly be an interesting sight.

other pity-exciting scenes besides the patient little water-carrying
donkeys are not likely to be wanting on the streets of an asiatic city;
one case i notice merits particular mention.  a youth with both arms
amputated at the shoulder, having not so much as the stump of an arm,
is riding a donkey, and persuading the unwilling animal along quite
briskly - with a stick.  all christendom could never guess how a person
thus afflicted could possibly wield a stick so as to make any impression
upon a donkey; but this ingenious person holds it quite handily between
his chin and right shoulder, and from constant practice has acquired the
ability to visit his long-eared steed with quite vigorous thwacks.

near noon we repair to the government house to pay a visit to sirra
pasha, the vali or governor of the vilayet, who, having heard of my
arrival, has expressed a wish to have us call on him.  we happen to arrive
while he is busily engaged with an important legal decision, but upon
our being announced he begs us to wait a few minutes, promising to hurry
through with the business.  we are then requested to enter an adjoining
apartment, where we find the mayor, the cadi, the secretary of state,
the chief of the angora zaptiehs, and several other functionaries, signing
documents, affixing seals, and otherwise variously occupied.  at our
entrance, documents, pens, seals, and everything are relegated to temporary
oblivion, coffee and cigarettes are produced, and the journey dunianin
-athrafana (around the world) i am making with the wonderful araba becomes
the all-absorbing subject.  these wise men of state entertain queer,
asiatic notions concerning the probable object of my journey; they cannot
bring themselves to believe it possible that i am performing so great a
journey "merely as the outing correspondent;" they think it more probable,
they say, that my real incentive is to "spite an enemy" - that, having
quarrelled with another wheelman about our comparative skill as riders,
i am wheeling entirely around the globe in order to prove my superiority,
and at the same time leave no opportunity for my hated rival to perform
a greater feat - asiatic reasoning, sure enough.  reasoning thus, and
commenting in this wise among themselves, their curiosity becomes worked
up to the highest possible pitch, and they commence plying mr. binns
with questions concerning the mechanism and general appearance of the
bicycle.  to facilitate mr. binns in his task of elucidation, i produce
from my inner coat-pocket a set of the earlier sketches illustrating the
tour across america, and for the next few minutes the set of sketches
are of more importance than all the state documents in the room.  curiously
enough, the sketch entitled "a fair young mormon " attracts more attention
than any of the others.  the mayor is suleiman effendi, the same gentleman
mentioned at some length by colonel burnaby in his "on horseback through
asia minor," and one of his first questions is whether i am acquainted
with "my friend burnaby, whose tragic death in the soudan will never
cease to make me feel unhappy." suleiman effendi appears to be remarkably
intelligent, compared with many asiatics, and, moreover, of quite a
practical turn of mind; he inquires what i should do in case of a serious
break-down somewhere in the far interior, and his curiosity to see the
bicycle is not a little increased by hearing that, notwithstanding the
extreme airiness of my strange vehicle, i have had no serious mishap on
the whole journey across two continents.  alluding to the bicycle as the
latest product of that western ingenuity that appears so marvellous to
the asiatic mind, he then remarks, with some animation, "the next thing
we shall see will be englishmen crossing over to india in balloons, and
dropping down at angora for refreshments." a uniformed servant now
announces that the vali is at liberty, and waiting to receive us in
private audience.  following the attendant into another room, we find
sirra pasha seated on a richly cushioned divan, and upon our entrance
he rises smilingly to receive us, shaking us both cordially by the hand.
as the distinguished visitor of the occasion, i am appointed to the place
of honor next to the governor, while mr. binns, with whom, of course,
as a resident of angora, his excellency is already quite well acquainted,
graciously fills the office of interpreter, and enlightener of the vali's
understanding concerning bicycles in general, and my own wheel and wheel
journey in particular.  sirra pasha is a full-faced man of medium height,
black-eyed, black-haired, and, like nearly all turkish pashas, is rather
inclined to corpulency.  like many prominent turkish officials, he has
discarded the turkish costume, retaining only the national fez; a head-
dress which, by the by, is without one single merit to recommend it save
its picturesqueness.  in sunny weather it affords no protection to the
eyes, and in rainy weather its contour conducts the water in a trickling
stream down one's spinal column.  it is too thin to protect the scalp
from the fierce sun-rays, and too close-fitting and close in texture to
afford any ventilation, yet with all this formidable array of disadvantages
it is universally worn.

i have learned during the morning that i have to thank sirra pasha's
energetic administration for the artificial highway from keshtobek, and
that he has constructed in the vilayet no less than two hundred and fifty
miles' of this highway, broad and reasonably well made, and actually
macadamized in localities where the necessary material is to be obtained.
the amount of work done in constructing this road through so mountainous
a country is, as before mentioned, plainly out of all proportion to the
wealth and population of a second-grade vilayet like angora, and its
accomplishment has been possible only by the employment of forced labor.
every man in the whole vilayet is ordered out to work at the road-making
a certain number of days every year, or provide a substitute; thus,
during the present summer there have been as many as twenty thousand
men, besides donkeys, working on the roads at one time.  unaccustomed to
public improvements of this nature, and, no doubt, failing to see their
advantages in a country practically without vehicles, the people have
sometimes ventured to grumble at the rather arbitrary proceeding of
making them work for nothing, and board themselves; and it has been found
expedient to make them believe that they were doing the preliminary
grading for a railway that was shortly coming to make them all prosperous
and happy; beyond being credulous enough to swallow the latter part of
the bait, few of them have the least idea of what sort of a looking thing
a railroad would be.

when the vali hears that the people all along the road have been telling
me it was a chemin de fer, he fairly shakes in his boots with laughter.
of course i point out that no one can possibly appreciate the road
improvements any more than a wheelman, and explain the great difference
i have found between the mule-paths of kodjaili and the broad highways
he has made through angora, and i promise him the universal good opinion
of the whole world of 'cyclers.  in reply, his excellency hopes this
favorable opinion will not be jeopardized by the journey to yuzgat, but
expresses the fear that i shall find heavier wheeling in that direction,
as the road is newly made, and there has been no vehicular traffic to
pack it down.

the governor invites me to remain over until thursday and witness the
ceremony of laying the corner-stone of a new school, of the founding of
which he has good reason to feel proud, and which ought to secure him
the esteem of right-thinking people everywhere.  he has determined it to
be a common school in which no question of mohammedan, jew, or christian,
will be allowed to enter, but where the young ideas of turkish, christian,
and jewish youths shall be taught to shoot peacefully and harmoniously
together.  begging to be excused from this, he then invites me to take
dinner with him to-morrow evening: but this i also decline, excusing
rnyself for having determined to remain over no longer than a day on
account of the approaching rainy season and my anxiety to reach teheran
before it sets in.  yet a third time the pasha rallies to the charge, as
though determined not to let me off without honoring me in some way; and
this time he offers to furnish me a zaptieh escort, but i tell him of
the zaptieh's inability to keep up yesterday, at which he is immensely
amused.  his excellency then promises to be present at the starting-point
to-morrow morning, asking me to name the time and place, after which we
finish the cigarettes and coffee and take our leave.  we next take a
survey of the mohair caravansary, where buyers and sellers and exporters
congregate to transact business, and i watch with some interest the corps
of half-naked sorters seated before large heaps of mohair, assorting it
into the several classes ready for exportation.  here mr. binns' office
is situated, and we are waited upon by several of his business acquaintances;
among them a member of the celebrated - celebrated in asia minor - tif-
ticjeeoghlou family, whose ancestors have been prominently engaged in
the mohair business for so long that their very name is significatory
of their profession - tifticjee-oghlou, literally, "mohair-dealer's son."
the smiths, bakers, and hunters of occidental society are not a whit
more significative than are many prominent names of the orient.  prominent
among the angorians is a certain mr. altentopoghlou, the literal
interpretation of which is, "son of the golden ball," and the origin
of whose family name eastern tradition has surrounded by the following
little interesting anecdote: ages ago it pleased one of the sultans to
issue a proclamation throughout the empire, promising to present a golden
ball to whichever among all his subjects should prove himself the biggest
liar, giving it to be understood beforehand that no "merely improbable
story" would stand the ghost of a chance of winning, since he himself
was to be the judge, and nothing short of a story that was simply
impossible would secure the prize.  the proclamation naturally made quite
a stir among the great prevaricators of the realm, and hundreds of stories
came pouring in from competitors everywhere, some even surreptitiously
borrowing "whoppers" from the persians, who are well known as the
greatest economizers of the truth in all asia; but they were one and all
adjudged by the astute monarch-who was himself a most experienced
prevaricator - probably the noblest roman of them all - as containing incidents
that might under extraordinary circumstances have been true.  the coveted
golden ball still remained unawarded, when one day there appeared before
the gate of the sultan's palace, requesting an audience, an old man with
travel-worn appearance, as though from a long pilgrimage, and bearing
on his stooping shoulders an immense earthen-ware jar.  the sultan received
the aged pilgrim kindly, and asked him what he could do for him.

"oh, sultan, may you live forever!" exclaimed the old man, "for your
imperial highness is loved and celebrated throughout all the empire
for your many virtues, but most of all for your wellknown love of justice."

"inshallah!" replied the monarch, reverently.  "may it please your
imperial majesty," continued the old man, calling the monarch's attention
to the jar, "your highness' most excellent father - may his bones rest in
peace! - borrowed from my father this jar full of gold coins, the conditions
being that your majesty was to pay the same amount back to me." "absurd,
impossible!" exclaimed the astonished sultan, eying the huge vessel in
question.

"if the story be true," gravely continued the pilgrim, "pay your father's
debt; if it is as you say, impossible, i have fairly won the golden
ball." and the sultan immediately awarded him the prize.

in the cool of the evening we ride out on horseback through vineyards
and yellow-berry gardens to mr. binns' country residence, a place that
formerly belonged to an old pasha, a veritable bluebeard, who built the
house and placed the windows of his harem, even closely latticed as they
always are, in a position that would not command so much as a glimpse
of passers-by on the road, hundreds of yards away.  he planted trees and
gardens, and erected marble fountains at great cost.  surrounding the
whole with a wall, and purchasing three beautiful young wives, the old
turk fondly fancied he had created for himself an earthly paradise; but
as love laughs at locksmiths, so did these three frisky damea laugh at
latticed windows, and lay their heads together against being prevented
from watching passers-by through the windows of the harem.  with nothing
else to do, they would scheme and plot all day long against their misguided
husband's tranquillity and peace of mind.  one day, while sunning himself
in the garden, he discovered that they had managed to detach a section
of the lattice-work from a window, and were in the habit of sticking out
their heads - awful discovery.  flying into a righteous rage at this act
of flagrant disobedience, he seized a thick stick and sought their
apartments, only to find the lattice-work skilfully replaced, and to be
confronted with a general denial of what he had witnessed with his own
eyes.  this did not prevent them from all three getting a severe chastisement;
but as time wore on he found the life these three caged-up young women
managed to lead him anything but the earthly paradise he thought he was
creating, and, financial troubles overtaking him at the same time, the
old fellow fairly died of a broken heart in less than twelve months after
he had so hopefully installed himself in his self-created heaven.

there is a moral in the story somewhere, i think, for anybody caring to
analyze it.  mr. binns says the old mussulman was also an inveterate hater
of unbelievers, and that the old fellow's bones would fairly rattle in
his coffin were he conscious that a family of christians are now actually
occupying the house he built with such careful regard for the mussulman's
ideas of a material heaven, with trees and fountains and black-eyed
houris.

near ten o'clock on tuesday morning finds angora the scene of more
excitement than it has seen for some time.  i am trundling through the
narrow streets toward the appointed starting-place, which is at the
commencement of a half-mile stretch of excellent level macadam, just
beyond the tombstone-planted suburbs of the city.  mr. binns is with me,
and a squad of zaptiehs are engaged in the lively occupation of protecting
us from the crush of people following us out; they are armed especially
for the occasion with long switches, with which they unsparingly lay
about them, seemingly only too delighted at the chance of making the
dust fly from the shoulders of such unfortunate wights as the pressure
of the throng forces anywhere near the magic cause of the commotion.  the
time and place of starting have been proclaimed by the vali and have
become generally noised abroad, and near three thousand people are already
assembled when we arrive; among them is seen the genial face of suleiman
effendi, who, in his capacity of mayor, is early on the ground with a
force of zaptiehs to maintain order; and with a little knot of friends,
behold, is also our humble friend the armenian pastor, the irresistible
attractions of the wicked bicycle having temporarily overcome his contempt
of the pomps and vanities of secular displays.

"englishmen are always punctual!" says suleiman effendi, looking at his
watch; and, upon consulting our own, sure enough we have happened to
arrive precisely to the minute.  an individual named mustapha, a blacksmith
who has acquired an enviable reputation for skill on account of the
beautiful horseshoes he turns out, now presents himself and begs leave
to examine the mechanism of the bicycle, and the question arises among
the officers standing by as to whether mustapha would be able to make
one; mustapha himself thinks he could, providing he had mine always at
hand to copy from.

"yes," suggests the practical-minded suleiman effendi, "yes, mustapha,
you may have mariftt enough to make one; but when you have finished it,
who among all of us will have marifet enough to ride it?"

"true, effendi," solemnly assents another, "we would have to send for
an englishman to ride it for us, after mustapha had turned it out.  "

the mayor now requests me to ride along the road once or twice to appease
the clamor of the multitude until the vali arrives.  the crowd along the
road is tremendous, and on a neighboring knoll, commanding a view of the
proceedings, are several carriageloads of ladies, the wives and female
relatives of the officials.  the mayor is indulgent to his people, allowing
them to throng the roadway, simply ordering the zaptiehs to keep my road
through the surging mass open.  while on the home-stretch from the second
spin, up dashes the vali in the state equipage with quite an imposing
bodyguard of mounted zaptiehs, their chief being a fine military-looking
circassian in the picturesque military costume of the caucasus.  these
horsemen the governor at once orders to clear the people entirely off
the road-way - an order no sooner given than executed; and after the
customary interchange of salutations, i mount and wheel briskly up the
broad, smooth macadam between two compact masses of delighted natives;
excitement runs high, and the people clap their hands and howl approvingly
at the performance, while the horsemen gallop briskly to and fro to keep
them from intruding on the road after i have wheeled past, and obstructing
the governor's view.  after riding back and forth a couple of times, i
dismount at the vali's carriage; a mutual interchange of adieus and well-
wishes all around, and i take my departure, wheeling along at a ten-mile
pace amid the vociferous plaudits of at least four thousand people, who
watch my retreating figure until i disappear over the brow of a hill.
at the upper end of the main crowd are stationed the "irregular cavalry"
on horses, mules, and donkeys; and among the latter i notice our
ingenious friend, the armless youth of yesterday, whom i now make happy
by a nod of recognition, having scraped up a backsheesh acquaintance
with him yesterday.

for.some miles the way continues fairly smooth and hard, leading through
a region of low vineyard-covered hills, but ere long i arrive at the
newly made road mentioned by the vali.  after which, like the course of
true love, my forward career seldom runs smooth for any length of time,
though ridable donkey-trails occasionally run parallel with the bogus
chemin defer.  for mile after mile i now alternately ride and trundle
along donkey-paths, by the side of an artificial highway that would be
an enterprise worthy of a european state.  the surface of the road is
either gravelled or of broken rock, and well rounded for self-drain-
age; it is graded over the mountains, and wooden bridges, with substantial
rock supports, are built across the streams; nothing is lacking except
the vehicles to utilize it.  in the absence of these it would almost seem
to have been an unnecessary and superfluous expenditure of the people's
labor to make such a road through a country most of which is fit for
little else but grazing goats and buffaloes.  aside from some half-dozen
carriages at angora, and a few light government postaya arabas - an
innovation from horses for carrying the mail, recently introduced as a
result of the improved roads, and which make weekly trips between such
points as angora, yuzgat, and tokat - the only vehicles in the country are
the buffalo-carts of the larger farmers, rude home made arabas with solid
wooden wheels, whose infernal creaking can be heard for a mile, and which
they seldom take any distance from home, preferring their pack-donkeys
and cross-country trails when going to town with produce.  perhaps in
time vehicular traffic may appear as a result of suitable roads; but the
natives are slow to adopt new improvements.

about two hours from angora i pass tbrough a swampy upland basin,
containing several small lakes, and then emerge into a much less mountainous
country, passing several mud villages, the inhabitants of which are a
dark-skinned people-turkoman refugees, i think-who look several degrees
less particular about their personal cleanliness than the villagers west
of angora.  their wretched mud hovels would seem to indicate the last
degree of poverty, but numerous flocks of goats and herds of buffalo
grazing near apparently tell a somewhat different story.  the women and
children seem mostly engaged in manufacturing cakes of tezek (large flat
cakes of buffalo manure mixed with chopped straw, which are "dobbed"
on the outer walls to dry; it makes very good fuel, like the "buffalo
chips" of the far west), and stacking it up on the house-tops, with
provident forethought, for the approaching winter.

just as darkness is beginning to settle down over the landscape i arrive
at one of these unpromising-looking clusters, which, it seems, are now
peculiar to the country, and not characteristic of any particular race,
for the one i arrive at is a purely turkish village.  after the usual
preliminaries of pantomime and binning, i am conducted to a capacious
flat roof, the common covering of several dwellings and stables bunched
up together.  this roof is as smooth and hard as a native threshing-floor,
and well knowing, from recent experiences, the modus operandi of capturing
the hearts of these bland and childlike villagers, i mount and straightway
secure their universal admiration and applause by riding a few times
round the roof.  i obtain a supper of fried eggs and yaort (milk soured
with rennet), eating it on the house-top, surrounded by the whole
population of the village, on this and adjoining roofs, who watch my
every movement with the most intense curiosity.  it is the raggedest
audience i have yet been favored with.  there are not over half a dozen
decently clad people among them all, and two of these are horsemen,
simply remaining over night, like myself.  everybody has a fearfully flea-
bitten appearance, which augurs ill for a refreshing night's repose.

here, likewise i am first introduced to a peculiar kind of bread, that
i straightway condemn as the most execrable of the many varieties my
everchanging experiences bring me in contact with, and which i find
myself mentally, and half unconsciously, naming - " blotting-paper ekmek"
-a not inappropriate title to convey its appearance to the civilized
mind; but the sheets of blotting-paper must be of a wheaten color and
in circular sheets about two feet in diameter.  this peculiar kind of
bread is, we may suppose, the natural result of a great scarcity of fuel,
a handful of tezek, beneath the large, thin sheet-iron griddle, being
sufficient to bake many cakes of this bread.  at first i start eating it
something like a shanty town goat would set about consuming a political
poster, if it - not the political poster, but the shanty town goat - had a
pair of hands.  this outlandish performance creates no small merriment
among the watchful on-lookers, who forthwith initiate me into the mode
of eating it a la turque, which is, to roll it up like a scroll of paper
and bite mouthfuls off the end.  i afterwards find this particular variety
of ekmek quite handy when seated around a communal bowl of yaort with a
dozen natives; instead of taking my turn with the one wooden spoon in
common use, i would form pieces of the thin bread into small handleless
scoops, and, dipping up the yaort, eat scoop and all.  besides sparing
me from using the same greasy spoon in common with a dozen natives, none
of them overly squeamish as regards personal cleanliness, this gave me
the appreciable advantage of dipping into the dish as often as i choose,
instead of waiting for my regular turn at the wooden spoon.

though they are osmanli turks, the women of these small villages appear
to make little pretence of covering their faces.  among themselves they
constitute, as it were, one large family gathering, and a stranger is
but seldom seen.  they are apparently simple-minded females, just a trifle
shame-faced in their demeanor before a stranger, sitting apart by
themselves while listening to the conversation between myself and the
men.  this, of course, is very edifying, even apart from its pantomimic
and monosyllabic character, for i am now among a queer people, a people
through the unoccupied chambers of whose unsophisticated minds wander
strange, fantastic thoughts.  one of the transient horsemen, a contemplative
young man, the promising appearance of whose upper lip proclaims him
something over twenty, announces that he likewise is on the way to yuzgat;
and after listening attentively to my explanations of how a wheelman
climbs mountains and overcomes stretches of bad road, he solemnly inquires
whether a 'cycler could scurry up a mountain slope all right if some one
were to follow behind and touch him up occasionally with a whip, in the
persuasive manner required in driving a horse.  he then produces a rawhide
"persuader," and ventures the opinion that if he followed close behind
me to yuzgat, and touched me up smartly with it whenever we came to a
mountain, or a sandy road, there would be no necessity of trundling any
of the way.  he then asks, with the innocent simplicity of a child, whether
in case he made the experiment, i would get angry and shoot him.

the other transient appears of a more speculative turn of mind, and draws
largely upon his own pantomimic powers and my limited knowledge of
turkish, to ascertain the difference between the katch lira of a bicycle
at retail, and the hatch lira of its manufacture.  from the amount of
mental labor he voluntarily inflicts upon himself to acquire this
particular item of information, i apprehend that nothing less than wild
visions of acquiring a rapid fortune by starting a bicycle factory at
angora, are flitting through his imaginative mind.  the villagers themselves
seem to consider me chiefly from the standpoint of their own peculiar
ideas concerning the nature of an englishman's feelings toward a russian.
my performance on the roof has put them in the best of humor, and has
evidently whetted their appetites for further amusement.  pointing to a
stolid-looking individual, of an apparently taciturn disposition, and
who is one of the respectably-dressed few, they accuse him of being a
eussiau; and then all eyes are turned towards me, as though they quite
expect to see me rise up wrathfully and make some warlike demonstration
against him.  my undemonstrative disposition forbids so theatrical a
proceeding, however, and i confine myself to making a pretence of falling
into the trap, casting furtive glances of suspicion towards the supposed
hated subject of the czar, and making whispered inquiries of my immediate
neighbors concerning the nature of his mission in turkish territory.
during this interesting comedy the "audience" are fairly shaking in
their rags with suppressed merriment; and when the taciturn individual
himself - who has thus far retained his habitual self-composure - growing
restive under the hateful imputation of being a muscov and my supposed
bellicose sentiments toward him in consequence, finally repudiates the
part thus summarily assigned him, the whole company bursts out into a
boisterous roar of laughter.  at this happy turn of sentiment i assume
an air of intense relief, shake the taciturn man's hand, and, borrowing
the speculative transient's fez, proclaim myself a turk, an act that
fairly "brings down the house."

thus the evening passes merrily away until about ten o'clock, when the
people begin to slowly disperse to the roofs of their respective
habitations, the whole population sleeping on the house-tops, with no
roof over them save the star-spangled vault - the arched dome of the great
mosque of the universe, so often adorned with the pale yellow, crescent-shaped
emblem of their religion.  several families occupy the roof which has
been the theatre of the evening's social gathering, and the men now
consign me to a comfortable couch made up of several quilts, one of the
transients thoughtfully cautioning me to put my moccasins under my pillow,
as these articles were the object of almost universal covetousness during
the evening.  no sooner am i comfortably settled down, than a wordy warfare
breaks out in my immediate vicinity, and an ancient female makes a
determined dash at my coverlet, with the object of taking forcible
possession; but she is seized and unceremoniously hustled away by the
men who assigned me my quarters.  it appears that, with an eye singly and
disinterestedly to my own comfort, and regardless of anybody else's,
they have, without taking the trouble to obtain her consent, appropriated
to my use the old lady's bed, leaving her to shift for herself any way
she can, a high-handed proceeding that naturally enough arouses her
virtuous indignation to the pitch of resentment.  upon this fact occurring
to me, i of course immediately vacate the property in dispute, and, with
true western gallantry, arraign myself on the rightful owner's side by
carrying my wheel and other effects to another position; whereupon a
satisfactory compromise is soon arranged between the disputants, by which
another bed ia prepared for me, and the ancient dame takes triumphant
possession of her own.  peace and tranquillity being thus established on
a firm basis, the several families tenanting our roof settle themselves
snugly down.  the night is still and calm, and naught is heard save my
nearer neighbors' scratching, scratching, scratching.  this - not the
scratching, but the quietness - doesn't last long, however, for it is
customary to collect all the four-footed possessions of the village
together every night and permit them to occupy the inter-spaces between
the houses, while the humans are occupying the roofs, the horde of watch-
dogs being depended upon to keep watch and ward over everything.  the
hovels are more underground than above the surface, and often, when the
village occupies sloping ground, the upper edge of the roof is practically
but a continuation of the solid ground, or at the most there is but a
single step-up between them.  the goats are of course permitted to wander
whithersoever they will, and equally, of course, they abuse their
privileges by preferring the roofs to the ground and wandering incessantly
about among the sleepers.  where the roof comes too near the ground some
temporary obstruction is erected, to guard against the intrusion of
venturesome buffaloes.  no sooner have the humans quieted down, than
several goats promptly invade the roof, and commence their usual nocturnal
promenade among the prostrate forms of their owners, and further indulge
their well-known goatish propensities by nibbling away the edges of the
roof. (they would, of course, prefer a square meal off a patchwork quilt,
but from their earliest infancy they are taught that meddling with the
bedclothes will bring severe punishment.) a buffalo occasionally gives
utterance to a solemn, prolonged " m-o-o-o;" now and then a baby wails
its infantile disapproval of the fleas, and frequent noisy squabbles
occur among the dogs.  under these conditions, it is not surprising that
one should woo in vain the drowsy goddess; and near midnight some person
within a few yards of my couch begins groaning fearfully, as if in great
pain - probably a case of the stomach-ache, i mentally conclude, though
this hasty conclusion may not unnaturally result from an inner consciousness
of being better equipped for curing that particular affliction than any
other.  from the position of the sufferer, i am inclined to think it is
the same ancient party that ousted me out of her possessions two hours
ago, and i lay here as far removed from the realms of unconsciousness
as the moment i retired, expecting every minute to see her appear before
me in a penitential mood, asking me to cure her, for the inevitable hakim
question had been raised during the evening.  she doesn't present herself,
however; perhaps the self-accusations of her conscience, for having in
the moment of her wrath attempted to appropriate my coverlet in so rude
a manner, prevent her appealing to me now in the hour of distress.  these
people are early risers; the women are up milking the goats and buffaloes
before daybreak, and the men hieing them away to the harvest fields and
threshing-floors.  i, likewise, bestir myself at daylight, intending to
reach the next village before breakfast.






chapter xiv.




across the kizil irmak river to yuzgat.

the country continues much the same as yesterday, with the road indifferent
for wheeling.  reaching the expected village about eight o'clock, i
breakfast off ekmek and new buffalo milk, and at once continue on my
way, meeting nothing particularly interesting, save a lively bout
occasionally with goat-herds' dogs - the reminiscences of which are doubtless
more vividly interesting to myself than they would be to the reader - until
high noon, when i arrive at another village, larger, but equally wretched-
looking, on the kizil irmak river, called jas-chi-khan.  on the west bank
of the stream are some ancient ruins of quite massive architecture, and
standing on the opposite side of the road, evidently having some time
been removed from the ruins with a view to being transported elsewhere,
is a couchant lion of heroic proportions, carved out of a solid block
of white marble; the head is gone, as though its would-be possessors,
having found it beyond their power to transport the whole animal, have
made off with what they could.  an old and curiously arched bridge of
massive rock spans the river near its entrance to a wild, rocky gorge
in the mountains; a primitive grist mill occupies a position to the left,
near the entrance to the gorge, and a herd of camels are slaking their
thirst or grazing near the water's edge to the right - a genuine eastern
picture, surely, and one not to be seen every day, even in the land where
to see it occasionally is quite possible.

riding into jas-chi-khan, i dismount at a building which, from the
presence of several "do-nothings," i take to be a khan for the accommodation
of travellers.  in a partially open shed-like apartment are a number of
demure looking maidens, industriously employed in weaving carpets by
hand on a rude, upright frame, while two others, equally demure-looking,
are seated on the ground cracking wheat for pillau, wheat being substituted
for rice where the latter is not easily obtainable, or is too expensive.
waiving all considerations of whether i am welcome or not, i at once
enter this abode of female industry, and after watching the interesting
process of carpet-weaving for some minutes, turn my attention to the
preparers of cracked wheat.  the process is the same primitive one that
has been employed among these people from time immemorial, and the same
that is referred to in the passage of scripture which says: "two women
were grinding corn in the field;" it consists of a small upper and nether
millstone, the upper one being turned round by two women sitting facing
each other; they both take hold of a perpendicular wooden handle with
one hand, employing the other to feed the mill and rake away the cracked
grain.  these two young women have evidently been very industrious this
morning; they have half-buried themselves in the product of their labors,
and are still grinding away as though for their very lives, while the
constant "click-clack " of the carpet weavers prove them likewise the
embodiment of industry.  they seem rather disconcerted by the abrupt
intrusion and scrutinizing attentions of a frank and a stranger; however,
the fascinating search for bits of interesting experience forbids my
retirement on that account, but rather urges me to make the most
of fleeting opportunities.  picking up a handful of the cracked wheat, i
inquire of one of the maidens if it is for pillau; the maiden blushes
at being thus directly addressed, and with downcast eyes vouchsafes an
affirmative nod in reply; at the same time an observant eye happens to
discover a little brown big-toe peeping out of the heap of wheat, and
belonging to the same demure maiden with the downcast eyes.  i know full
well that i am stretching a point of mohammedan etiquette, even by coming
among these industrious damsels in the manner i am doing, but the attention
of the men is fully concentrated on the bicycle outside, and the
temptation of trying the experiment of a little jocularity, just to see
what comes of it, is under the circumstances irresistible.  conscious of
venturing where angels fear to tread.  i stoop down, and take hold of the
peeping little brown big-toe, and addressing the demure maiden with the
downcast eyes, inquire, "is this also for pillau." this proves entirely
too much for the risibilities of the industrious pillau grinders, and
letting go the handle of the mill, they both give themselves up to
uncontrollable laughter; the carpet-weavers have been watching me out
of the corners of their bright, black eyes, and catching the infection,
the click clack of the carpet-weaving machines instantly ceases, and
several of the weavers hurriedly retreat into an adjoining room to avoid
the awful and well-nigh unheard-of indiscretion of laughing in the
presence of a stranger.  having thus yielded to the temptation and witnessed
the results, i discreetly retire, meeting at the entrance a gray-bearded
turk coming to see what the merriment and the unaccountable stopping of
the carpet-weaving frames is all about.  a sheep has been slaughtered in
jas-chi-khan this morning, and i obtain a nice piece of mutton, which i
hand to a bystander, asking him to go somewhere and cook it; in five
minutes he returns with the meat burnt black outside and perfectly raw
within.  seeing my evident disapproval of its condition, the same ancient
person who recently appeared upon the scene of my jocular experiment and
who has now squatted himself down close beside me, probably to make sure
against any further indiscretions, takes the meat, slashes it across in
several directions with his dagger, orders the afore-mentioned bystander
to try it over again, and then coolly wipes his blackened and greasy
fingers on my sheet of ekmek as though it were a table napkin.  i obtain
a few mouthfuls of eatable meat from the bystander's second culinary
effort, and then buy a water-melon from a man happening along with a
laden donkey; cutting iuto the melon i find it perfectly green all
through, and toss it away; the men look surprised, and some youngsters
straightway pick it up, eat the inside out until they can scoop out no
more, and then, breaking the rind in pieces, they scrape it out with
their teeth until it is of egg-shell thinness.  they seem to do these
things with impunity in asia.

the grade and the wind are united against me on leaving jas-chi-khan,
but it is ridable, and having made such a dismal failure about getting
dinner, i push on toward a green area at the base of a rocky mountain
spur, which i observed an hour ago from a point some distance west of
the kizil irmak, and concluded to be a cluster of vineyards.  this
conjecture turns out quite correct, and, what is more, my experience
upon arriving there would seem to indicate that the good genii detailed
to arrange the daily programme of my journey had determined to recompense
me to-day for having seen nothing of the feminine world of late but
yashmaks and shrouds, and momentary monocular evidence; for here again
am i thrown into the society of a bevy of maidens, more interesting, if
anything, than the nymphs of industry at jas-chi-khan.  there is apparently
some festive occasion at the little vineyard-environed village, which
stands back a hundred yards or so from the road, and which ia approached
by a narrow foot-way between thrifty-looking vineyards.  three blooming
damsels, in all the bravery of holiday attire, with necklaces and pendants
of jingling coins to distinguish them from the matrons, come hurrying
down the pathway toward the road at my approach.  seeing me dismount,
upon arriving opposite the village, the handsomest and gayest dressed
of the three goes into one of the vineyards, and with charming grace of
manner, presents herself before me with both hands overflowing with
bunches of luscious black grapes.  their abundant black tresses are
gathered in one long plait behind; they wear bracelets, necklaces,
pendants, brow-bands, head ornaments, and all sorts of wonderful articles
of jewelry, made out of the common silver and metallic coins of the
country; they are small of stature and possess oval faces, large black eyes,
and warm, dark complexions.  their manner and dress prove rather a puzzle
in determining their nationality; they are not turkish, nor greek, nor
armenian, nor circassian; they may possibly be sedentary turkomans; but
they possess rather a jewish cast of countenance, and my first impression
of them is, that they are "bible people," the original inhabitants of the
country, who have somehow managed to cling to their little possessions here,
in spite of greeks, turks, and persians, and other conquering races who
have at times overrun the country; perhaps they have softened the hearts of
everybody undertaking to oust them by their graceful manners.

other villagers soon collect, making a picturesque and interesting group
around the bicycle; but the maiden with the grapes makes too pretty and
complete a picture, for any of the others to attract more than passing
notice.  one of her two companions whisperingly calls her attention to
the plainly evident fact that she is being regarded with admiration by
the stranger.  she blushes perceptibly through her nut-brown cheeks at
hearing this, but she is also quite conscious of her claims to admiration,
and likes to be admired; so she neither changes her attitude of respectful
grace, nor raises her long drooping eyelashes, while i eat and eat grapes,
taking them bunch after bunch from her overflowing hands, until ashamed
to eat any more.  i confess to almost falling in love with that maiden,
her manners were so easy and graceful; and when, with ever-downcast eyes
and a bewitching manner that leaves not the slightest room for considering
the doing so a bold or forward action, she puts the remainder of the
grapes in my coat pockets, a peculiar fluttering sensation - but i draw a
veil over my feelings, they are too sacred for the garish pages of a
book.  i do not inquire about their nationality, i would rather it remain
a mystery, and a matter for future conjecture; but before leaving i add
something to her already conspicuous array of coins that have been
increasing since her birth, and which will form her modest dowry at
marriage.  the road continues of excellent surface, but rather hilly for
a few miles, when it descends into the valley of the delijeh irmak, where
the artificial highway again deteriorates into the unpacked condition
of yesterday; the donkey trails are shallow trenches of dust, and are
no longer to be depended upon as keeping my general course, but are
rather cross-country trails leading from one mountain village to another.
the well-defined caravan trail leading from ismidt to angora comes no
farther eastward than the latter city, which is the central point where
the one exportable commodity of the vilayet is collected for barter and
transportation to the seaboard.  the delijeh irmak valley is under partial
cultivation, and occasionally one passes through small areas of melon
gardens far away from any permanent habitations; temporary huts or dug-
outs are, however, an invariable adjunct to these isolated possession
of the villagers, in which some one resides day and night during the
melon season, guarding their property with gun and dog from unscrupulous
wayfarers, who otherwise would not hesitate to make their visit to town
profitable as well as pleasurable, by surreptitiously confiscating a
donkey-load of salable melons from their neighbor's roadside garden.
sometimes i essay to purchase a musk-melon from these lone sentinels,
but it is impossible to obtain one fit to eat; these wretched prayers
on nature's bounty evidently pluck and devour them the moment they develop
from the bitterness of their earliest growth.  no villages are passed on
the road after leaving the vintagers' cluster at noon, but bunches of
mud hovels are at intervals descried a few miles to the right, perched
among the hills that form the southern boundary of the valley; being of
the same color as the general surface about them, they are not easily
distinguishable at a distance.  there seems to be a decided propensity
among the natives for choosing the hills as an habitation, even when
their arable lands are miles away in the valley; the salubrity of the
more elevated location may be the chief consideration, but a swiftly
flowing mountain rivulet near his habitation is to the mohammedan a
source of perpetual satisfaction.

i travel along for some time after nightfall, in hopes of reaching a
village, but none appearing, i finally decide to camp out.  choosing a
position behind a convenient knoll, i pitch the tent where it will bo
invisible from the road, using stones in lieu of tent-pegs; and inhabiting
for the first time this unique contrivance, i sup off the grapes remaining
over from the bountiful feast at noon-and, being without any covering,
stretch myself without undressing beside the upturned bicycle; notwithstanding
the gentle reminders of unsatisfied hunger, i am enjoying the legitimate
reward of constant exercise in the open air ten minutes after pitching
the tent.  soon after midnight i am awakened by the chilly influence of
the "wee sma' hours," and recognizing the likelihood of the tent proving
more beneficial as a coverlet than a roof, in the absence of rain, i
take it down and roll myself up in it; the thin, oiled cambric is far
from being a blanket, however, and at daybreak the bicycle and everything
is drenched with one of the heavy dews of the country.  ten miles over
an indifferent road is traversed next morning; the comfortless reflection
that anything like a "square meal" seems out of the question anywhere
between the larger towns scarcely tends to exert a soothing influence
on the ravenous attacks of a most awful appetite; and i am beginning to
think seriously of making a detour of several miles to reach a mountain
village, when i meet a party of three horsemen, a turkish bey - with an
escort of two zaptiehs.  i am trundling at the time, and without a moment's
hesitancy i make a dead set at the bey, with the single object of
satisfying to some extent my gastronomic requirements.

"bey effendi, have you any ekmek?" i ask, pointing inquiringly to his
saddle-bags on a zaptieh's horse, and at the same time giving him to
understand by impressive pantomime the uncontrollable condition of my
appetite.  with what seems to me, under the circumstances, simply cold-
blooded indifference to human suffering; the bey ignores my inquiry
altogether, and concentrating his whole attention on the bicycle, asks,
"what is that?" "an americanish araba, effendi; have you any ekmek ?"
toying suggestively with the tell-tale slack of my revolver belt.

"where have you come from?" "stamboul; have you ekmek in the saddle-
bags, effendi." this time boldly beckoning the zaplieh with the bey's
effects to approach nearer.

"where are you going?" "yuzgat! ekmek! ekmek!" tapping the saddle-bags
in quite an imperative manner.  this does not make any outward impression
upon the bey's aggravating imperturbability, however; he is not so
indifferent to my side of the question as he pretends; aware of his
inability to supply my want, and afraid that a negative answer would
hasten my departure before he has fully satisfied his curiosity concerning
me, he is playing a. little game of diplomacy in his own interests.

"what is it for." he now asks, with soul-harrowing indifference to all
my counter inquiries." to bin," i reply, desperately, curt and indifferent,
beginning to see through his game.  " bin, bin! bacalem." he says;
supplementing the request with a coaxing smile.  at the same moment my
long-suffering digestive apparatus favors me with an unusually savage
reminder, and nettled beyond the point where forbearance ceases to be
any longer a virtue, i return an answer not exactly complimentary to the
bey's ancestors, and continue my hungry way down the valley.  a couple
of miles after leaving the bey, i intercept a party of peasants traversing
a cross-country trail, with a number of pack-donkeys loaded with rock-salt,
from whom i am fortunately able to obtain several thin sheets of ekmek,
which i sit down and devour immediately, without even water to moisten
the repast; it seems one of the most tasteful and soul-satisfying
breakfasts i ever ate.

like misfortunes, blessings never seem to come singly, for, an hour after
thus breaking my fast i happen upon a party of villagers working on an
unfinished portion of the new road; some of them are eating their morning
meal of ekmek and yaort, and no sooner do i appear upon the scene than
i am straightway invited to partake, a seat in the ragged circle congregated
around the large bowl of clabbered milk being especially prepared with
a bunch of pulled grass for my benefit.  the eager hospitality of these
poor villagers is really touching; they are working without so much as
"thank you" for payment, there is not a garment amongst the gang fit
for a human covering; their unvarying daily fare is the "blotting-paper
ekmek" and yaort, with a melon or a cucumber occasionally as a luxury;
yet, the moment i approach, they assign me a place at their "table,"
and two of them immediately bestir themselves to make me a comfortable
seat.  neither is there so much as a mercenary thought among them in
connection with the invitation; these poor fellows, whose scant rags it
would be a farce to call clothing, actually betray embarrassment at the
barest mention of compensation; they fill my pockets with bread, apologize
for the absence of coffee, and compare the quality of their respective
pouches of native tobacco in order to make me a decent cigarette.

never, surely, was the reputation of dame fortune for fickleness so
completely proved as in her treatment of me this morning - ten o'clock
finds me seated on a pile of rugs in a capacious black tent, "wrassling"
with a huge bowl of savory mutton pillau, flavored with green herbs, as
the guest of a koordish sheikh; shortly afterwards i meet a man taking
a donkey-load of musk-melons to the koordish camp, who insists on
presenting me with the finest melon i have tasted since leaving
constantinople; and high noon finds me the guest of another koordish
sheikh; thus does a morning, which commenced with a fair prospect of no
breakfast, following after yesterday's scant supply of unsuitable food,
end in more hospitality than i know what to do with.  these nomad tribes
of the famous "black-tents " wander up toward angora every summer with
their flocks, in order to be near a market at shearing time; they are
famed far and wide for their hospitality.  upon approaching the great
open-faced tent of the sheikh, there is a hurrying movement among the
attendants to prepare a suitable raised seat, for they know at a glance
that i am an englishman, and likewise are aware that an englishman cannot
sit cross-legged like an asiatic; at first, i am rather surprised at
their evident ready recognition of my nationality, but i soon afterwards
discover the reason.  a hugh bowl of pillau, and another of excellent
yaort is placed before me without asking any questions, while the dignified
old sheikh fulfils one's idea of a gray-bearded nomad patriarch to
perfection, as he sits cross legged on a rug, solemnly smoking a nargileh,
and watching to see that no letter of his generous code of hospitality
toward strangers is overlooked by the attendants.  these latter seem to
be the picked young men of the tribe; fine, strapping fellows, well-dresed,
six-footers, and of athletic proportions; perfect specimens of semi-
civilized manhood, that would seem better employed in a grenadier regiment
than in hovering about the old sheikh's tent, attending to the filling
and lighting of his nargileh, the arranging of his cushions by day and
his bed at night, the serving of his food, and the proper reception of
his guests; and yet it is an interesting sight to see these splendid
young fellows waiting upon their beloved old chieftain, fairly bounding,
like great affectionate mastiffs, at his merest look or suggestion.  most
of the boys and young men are out with the flocks, but the older men,
the women and children, gather in a curious crowd before the open tent;
they maintain a respectful silence so long as i am their sheikh's guest,
but they gather about me without reserve when i leave the hospitable
shelter of that respected person's quarters.  after examining my helmet
and sizing up my general appearance, they pronounce me an "english
zaptieh," a distinction for which i am indebted to the circumstance of
col.  n--, an english officer, having recently been engaged in koordistan
organizing a force of native zaptiehs.  the women of this particular camp
seem, on the whole, rather unprepossessing specimens; some of them are
hooked-nosed old hags, with piercing black eyes, and hair dyed to a
flaming "carrotty" hue with henna; this latter is supposed to render
them beautiful, and enhance their personal appearance in the eyes of the
men; they need something to enhance their personal appearance, certainly,
but to the untutored and inartistic eye of the writer it produces a
horrid, unnatural effect.  according to our ideas, flaming red hair looks
uncanny and of vulgar, uneducated taste, when associated with coal-black
eyes and a complexion like gathering darkness.  these vain mortals seem
inclined to think that in me they have discovered something to be petted
and made much of, treating me pretty much as a troop of affectionate
little girls - would treat a wandering kitten that might unexpectedly
appear in their midst.  giddy young things of about fifty summers cluster
around me in a compact body, examining my clothes from helmet to moccasins,
and critically feeling the texture of my coat and shirt, they take off
my helmet, reach over each other's shoulders to stroke my hair, and pat
my cheeks in the most affectionate manner; meanwhile expressing themselves
in soft, purring comments, that require no linguistic abilities to
interpret into such endearing remarks as, "ain't he a darling, though?"
"what nice soft hair and pretty blue eyes." "don't you wish the
dear old sheikh would let us keep him.  "considering the source whence
it comes, it requires very little of this to satisfy one, and as soon
as i can prevail upon them to let me escape, i mount and wheel away,
several huge dogs escorting me, for some minutes, in the peculiar manner
koordish dogs have of escorting stray 'cyclers.






chapter xv.




from the koordish camp to yuzgat.

>from the koordish encampment my route leads over a low mountain spur by
easy gradients, and by a winding, unridable trail down into the valley
of the eastern fork of the delijah irmak.  the road improves as this
valley is reached, and noon finds me the wonder and admiration of another
koordish camp, where i remain a couple of hours in deference to the
powers of the midday sun.  one has no scruples about partaking of the
hospitality of the nomad koords, for they are the wealthiest people in
the country, their flocks covering the hills in many localities; they
are, as a general thing, fairly well dressed, are cleaner in their cooking
than the villagers, and hospitable to the last degree.  like the rest of
us, however, they have their faults as well as their virtues; they are
born freebooters, and in unsettled times, when the turkish government,
being handicapped by weightier considerations, is compelled to relax its
control over them, they seldom fail to promptly respond to their plundering
instincts and make no end of trouble.  they still retain their hospitableness,
but after making a traveller their guest for the night, and allowing him
to depart with everything he has, they will intercept him on the road
and rob him.  they have some objectionable habits, even in these peaceful
times, which will better appear when we reach their own koordistan, where
we shall, doubtless, have better opportunities for criticising them.
whatever their faults or virtues, i leave this camp, hoping that the
termination of the day may find me the guest of another sheikh for the
night an hour after leaving this camp i pass through an area of vineyards,
out of which people come running with as many grapes among them as would
feed a dozen people; the road is ridable, and i hurry along to avoid
their bother.  verily it would seem that i am being hounded down by
retributive justice for sundry evil thoughts and impatient remarks,
associated with my hungry experiences of early morning; then i was
wondering where the next mouthful of food was going to overtake me, this
afternoon finds me pedalling determinedly to prevent being overtaken by
it.

the afternoon is hot and with scarcely a breath of air moving; the little
valley terminates in a region of barren, red hills, on which the sun
glares fiercely; some toughish climbing has to be accomplished in scaling
a ridge, and then.  i emerge into an upland lava plateau, where the only
vegetation is sun-dried weeds and thistles.  here a herd of camels are
contentedly browsing, munching the dry, thorny herbage with a satisfaction
that is evident a mile away.  from casual observations along the route,
i am inclined to think a camel not far behind a goat in the depravity
of its appetite; a camel will wander uneasily about over a greensward
of moist, succulent grass, scanning his surroundings in search of giant
thistles, frost-bitten tumble-weeds, tough, spriggy camel thorns, and
odds and ends of unpalatable vegetation generally.  of course, the "ship
of the desert" never sinks to such total depravity as to hanker after
old gum overshoes and circus posters, but if permitted to forage around
human habitations for a few generations, i think they would eventually
degenerate to the goat's disreputable level.  the expression of utter
astonishment that overspreads the angular countenance of the camels
browsing near the roadside, at my appearance, is one of the most ludicrous
sights imaginable; they seem quite intelligent enough to recognize in a
wheelman and his steed something inexplicable and foreign to their
country, and their look of timid inquiry seems ridiculously unsuited to
their size and the general ungainliness of their appearance, producing
a comical effect that is worth going miles to see.  it is approaching
sun-down, when, ascending a ridge overlooking another valley, i am
gratified at seeing it occupied by several koordish camps, their clusters
of black tents being a conspicuous feature of the landscape.  with a fair
prospect of hospitable quarters for the night before me, and there being
no distinguishable signs of a road, i make my way across country toward
one of the camps that seems to be nearest my proper course.  i have arrived
within a mile of my objective point, when i observe, at the base of a
mountain about half the distance to my right, a large, white two-storied
building, the most pretentious structure, by long odds, that has been
seen since leaving angora.  my curiosity is, of course, aroused concerning
its probable character; it looks like a bit of civilization that has in
some unaccountable manner found its way to a region where no other human
habitations are visible, save the tents of wild tribesmen, and i at once
shape my course toward it.  it turns out to be a rock-salt mine or quarry,
that supplies the whole region for scores of miles around with salt,
rock-salt being the only kind obtainable in the country; it was from
this mine that the donkey party from whom i first obtained bread this
morning fetched their loads.  here i am invited to remain over night, am
provided with a substantial supper, the menu including boiled mutton,
with cucumbers for desert.  the managers and employees of the, quarry
make their cucumbers tasteful by rubbing the end with a piece of rock-salt
each time it is cut off or bitten, each person keeping a select little
square for the purpose.  the salt is sold at the mine, and owners of
transportation facilities in the shape of pack animals make money by
purchasing it here at six paras an oke, and selling it at a profit in
distant towns.

two young men seem to have charge of transacting the business; one of
them is inordinately inquisitive, he even wants to try and unstick the
envelope containing a letter of introduction to mr. tifticjeeoghlou's
father in yuzgat, and read it out of pure curiosity to see what it says;
and he offers me a lira for my waterbury watch, notwithstanding its alla
franga face is beyond his turkish comprehension.  the loud, confident
tone in which the waterbury ticks impresses the natives very favorably
toward it, and the fact of its not opening at the back like other time-
pieces, creates the impression that it is a watch that never gets cranky
and out of order; quite different from the ones they carry, since their
curiosity leads them to be always fooling with the works.  american clocks
are found all through asia minor, fitted with oriental faces and there
is little doubt but the waterbury, with its resonant tick, if similiarly
prepared, would find here a ready market.  the other branch of the
managerial staff is a specimen of humanity peculiarly asiatic turkish,
a melancholy-faced, contemplative person, who spends nearly the whole
evening in gazing in silent wonder at me and the bicycle; now and then
giving expression to his utter inability to understand how such things
can possibly be by shaking his head and giving utterance to a peculiar
clucking of astonishment.  he has heard me mention having come from
stamboul, which satisfies him to a certain extent; for, like a true turk,
he believes that at stamboul all wonderful things originate; whether the
bicycle was made there, or whether it originally came from somewhere
else, doesn't seem to enter into his speculations; the simple knowledge
that i have come from stamboul is all-sufficient for him; so far as he
is concerned, the bicycle is simply another wonder from stamboul, another
proof that the earthly paradise of the mussulman world on the bosphorus
is all that he has been taught to believe it.  when the contemplative
young man ventures away from the dreamy realms of his own imaginations,
and from the society of his inmost thoughts, far enough to make a remark,
it is to ask me something about stamboul; but being naturally taciturn
and retiring, and moreover, anything but an adept at pantomimic language,
he prefers mainly to draw his own conclusions in silence.  he manages to
make me understand, however, that he intends before long making a journey
to see stamboul for himself; like many another turk from the barren hills
of the interior, he will visit the ottoman capital; he will recite from
the koran under the glorious mosaic dome of st. sophia; wander about
that wonder of the orient, the stamboul bazaar; gaze for hours on the
matchless beauties of the bosphorus ; ride on one of the steamboats; see
the railway, the tramway, the sultan's palaces, and the shipping, and
return to his native hills thoroughly convinced that in all the world
there is no place fit to be compared with stamboul; no place so full of
wonders; no place so beautiful; and wondering how even the land of the
kara ghuz kiz, the material paradise of the mohammedans, can possibly
be more lovely.  the contemplative young man is tall and slender, has
large, dreamy, black eyes, a downy upper lip, a melancholy cast of
countenance, and wears a long print wrapper of neat dotted pattern,
gathered at the waist with a girdle a la dressing-gown.

the inquisitive partner makes me up a comfortable bed of quilts on the
divan of a large room, which is also occupied by several salt traders
remaining over night, and into which their own small private apartments
open.  a few minutes after they have retired to their respective rooms,
the contemplative young man reappears with silent tread, and with a
scornful glance at my surroundings, both human and inanimate, gathers
up my loose effects, and bids me bring bicycle and everything into his
room; here, i find, he has already prepared for my reception quite a
downy couch, having contributed, among other comfortable things, his
wolf-skin overcoat; after seeing me comfortably established on a couch
more appropriate to my importance as a person recently from stamboul
than the other, he takes a lingering look at the bicycle, shakes his
head and clucks, and then extinguishes the light.  sunrise on the following
morning finds me wheeling eastward from the salt quarry, over a trail
well worn by salt caravans, to yuzgat; the road leads for some distance
down a grassy valley, covered with the flocks of the several koordish
camps round about; the wild herdsmen come galloping from all directions
across the valley toward me, their uncivilized garb and long swords
giving them more the appearance of a ferocious gang of cut-throats
advancing to the attack than shepherds.  hitherto, nobody has seemed any
way inclined to attack me; i have almost wished somebody would undertake
a little devilment of some kind, for the sake of livening things up a
little, and making my narrative more stirring; after venturing everything,
i have so far nothing to tell but a story of being everywhere treated
with the greatest consideration, and much of the time even petted.  i
have met armed men far away from any habitations, whose appearance was
equal to our most ferocious conception of bashi bazouks, and merely from
a disinclination to be bothered, perhaps being in a hurry at the time,
have met their curious inquiries with imperious gestures to be gone; and
have been guilty of really inconsiderate conduct on more than one occasion,
but under no considerations have i yet found them guilty of anything
worse than casting covetous glances at my effects.  but there is an
apparent churlishness of manner, and an overbearing demeanor, as of men
chafing under the restraining influences that prevent them gratifying
their natural free-booting instincts, about these koordish herdsmen whom
i encounter this morning, that forms quite a striking contrast to the
almost childlike harmlessness and universal respect toward me observed
in the disposition of the villagers.  it requires no penetrating scrutiny
of these fellows' countenances to ascertain that nothing could be more
uncongenial to them than the state of affairs that prevents them stopping
ine and looting me of everything i possess; a couple of them order me
quite imperatively to make a detour from my road to avoid approaching
too near their flock of sheep, and their general behavior is pretty much
as though seeking to draw me into a quarrel, that would afford them an
opportunity of plundering me.  continuing on the even tenor of my way,
affecting a lofty unconsciousness of their existence, and wondering
whether, in case of being molested, it would be advisable to use my smith
& wesson in defending my effects, or taking the advice received in
constantinople, offer no resistance whatever, and trust to being able
to recover them through the authorities, i finally emerge from their
vicinity.  their behavior simply confirms what i have previously understood
of their character; that while they will invariably extend hospitable
treatment to a stranger visiting their camps, like unreliable explosives,
they require to be handled quite "gingerly" when encountered on the
road, to prevent disagreeable consequences.

passing through a low, marshy district, peopled with solemn-looking
storks and croaking frogs, i meet a young sheikh and his personal
attendants returning from a morning's outing at their favorite sport of
hawking; they carry their falcons about on small perches, fastened by
the leg with a tiny chain.  i try to induce them to make a flight, but
for some reason or other they refuse; an osmanli turk would have
accommodated me in a minute.  soon i arrive at another koordish camp,
fording a stream in order to reach their tents, for i have not yet
breakfasted, and know full well that no better opportunity of obtaining
one will be likely to turn up.  entering the nearest tent, i make no
ceremony of calling for refreshments, knowing well enough that a heaping
dish of pillau will be forthcoming, and that the hospitable koords will
regard the ordering of it as the most natural thing in the world.  the
pillau is of rice, mutton, and green herbs, and is brought in a large
pewter dish; and, together with sheet bread and a bowl of excellent
yaort, is brought on a massive pewter tray, which has possibly belonged
to the tribe for centuries.  these tents are divided into several
compartments; one end is a compartment where the men congregate in the
daytime, and the younger men sleep at night, and where guests are received
and entertained; the central space is the commissary and female industrial
department; the others are female and family sleeping places.  each
compartment is partitioned off with a hanging carpet partition; light
portable railing of small, upright willow sticks bound closely together
protects the central compartment from a horde of dogs hungrily nosing
about the camp, and small "coops" of the same material are usually
built inside as a further protection for bowls of milk, yaort, butter,
cheese, and cooked food; they also obtain fowls from the villagers, which
they keep cooped up in a similar manner, until the hapless prisoners are
required to fulfil their destiny in chicken pillau; the capacious covering
over all is strongly woven goats'-hair material of a black or smoky brown
color.  in a wealthy tribe, the tent of their sheikh is often a capacious
affair, twenty-five by one hundred feet, containing, among other
compartments, stabling and hay-room for the sheikh's horses in winter.
my breakfast is brought in from the culinary department by a young woman
of most striking appearance, certainly not less than six feet in height;
she is of slender, willowy build, and straight as an arrow; a wealth of
auburn hair is surmounted by a small, gay-colored turban; her complexion
is fairer than common among koordish woman, and her features are the
queenly features of a juno; the eyes are brown and lustrous, and, were
the expression but of ordinary gentleness, the picture would be perfect;
but they are the round, wild-looking orbs of a newly-caged panther-
grimalkin eyes, that would, most assuredly, turn green and luminous in
the dark.  other women come to take a look at the stranger, gathering
around and staring at rne, while i eat, with all their eyes - and such
eyes.  i never before saw such an array of "wild-animal eyes;" no, not
even in the zoo.  many of them are magnificent types of womanhood in every
other respect, tall, queenly, and symmetrically perfect; but the eyes-oh,
those wild, tigress eyes.  travellers have told queer, queer stories about
bands of these wild-eyed koordish women waylaying and capturing them on
the roads through koordistan, and subjecting them to barbarous treatment.
i have smiled, and thought them merely "travellers' tales;" but i can
see plain enough, this morning, that there is no improbability in the
stories, for, from a dozen pairs of female eyes, behold, there gleams
not one single ray of tenderness: these women are capable of anything
that tigresses are capable of, beyond a doubt.  almost the first question
asked by the men of these camps is whether the english and muscovs are
fighting; they have either heard of the present (summer of 1885) crisis
over the afghan boundary question, or they imagine that the english and
russians maintain a sort of desultory warfare all the time.  when i tell
them that the muscov is fenna (bad) they invariably express their approval
of the sentiment by eagerly calling each other's attention to my expression.
it is singular with what perfect faith and confidence these rude tribesmen
accept any statement i choose to make, and how eagerly they seem to dwell
on simple statements of facts that are known to every school-boy in
christendom.  i entertain them with my map, showing them the position
of stamboul, mecca, erzeroum, and towns in their own koordistan, which
they recognize joyfully as i call them by name.  they are profoundly
impressed at the " extent of my knowledge," and some of the more deeply
impressed stoop down and reverently kiss stamboul and mecca, as i point
them out.  while thus pleasantly engaged, an aged sheikh comes to the
tent and straightway begins "kicking up a blooming row" about me.  it
seems that the others have been guilty of trespassing on the sheikh's
prerogative, in entertaining me themselves, instead of conducting me to
his own tent.  after upbraiding them in unmeasured terms, he angrily
orders several of the younger men to make themselves beautifully scarce
forthwith.  the culprits - some of them abundantly able to throw the old
fellow over their shoulders - instinctively obey; but they move off at a
snail's pace, with lowering brows, and muttering angry growls that betray
fully their untamed, intractable dispositions.

a two-hours' road experience among the constantly varying slopes of
rolling hills, and then comes a fertile valley, abounding in villages,
wheat-fields, orchards, and melon-gardens.  these days i find it incumbent
on me to turn washer-woman occasionally, and, halting at the first little
stream in this valley, i take upon myself the onerous duties of wall
lung in sacramento city, having for an interested and interesting audience
two evil-looking kleptomaniacs, buffalo-herders dressed in next to
nothing, who eye my garments drying on the bushes with lingering
covetousness.  it is scarcely necessary to add that i watch them quite
as interestingly myself; for, while i pity the scantiness of their
wardrobe, i have nothing that i could possibly spare among mine.  a network
of irrigating ditches, many of them overflowed, render this valley
difficult to traverse with a bicycle, and i reach a large village about
noon, myself and wheel plastered with mud, after traversing a, section
where the normal condition is three inches of dust.

bread and grapes are obtained here, a light, airy dinner, that is seasoned
and made interesting by the unanimous worrying of the entire population.
once i make a desperate effort to silence their clamorous importunities,
and obtain a little quiet, by attempting to ride over impossible ground,
and reap the well-merited reward of permitting my equanimity to be thus
disturbed in the shape of a header and a slightly-bent handle-bar.  while
i am eating, the gazing-stock of a wondering, commenting crowd, a
respectably dressed man elbows his way through the compact mass of humans
around me, and announces himself as having fought under osman pasha at
plevna.  what this has to do with me is a puzzler; but the man himself,
and every turk of patriotic age in the crowd, is evidently expecting to
see me make some demonstration of approval; so, not knowing what else
to do, i shake the man cordially by the hand, and modestly inform my
attentively listening audience that osman pasha and myself are brothers,
that osman yielded only when the overwhelming numbers of the muscovs
proved that it was his kismet to do so; and that the russians would never
be permitted to occupy constantinople; a statement, that probably makes
my simple auditors feel as though they were inheriting a new lease of
national life; anyhow, they seem not a little gratified at what i am
saying.

after this the people seem to find material for no end of amusement among
themselves, by contrasting the marifet of the bicycle with the marifet
of their creaking arabas, of which there seems to be quite a number in
this valley.  they are used chiefly in harvesting, are roughly made, used,
and worn out in these mountain-environed valleys without ever going
beyond the hills that encompass them in on every side.  from these villages
the people begin to evince an alarming disposition to follow me out some
distance on donkeys.  this undesirable trait of their character is, of
course, easily counteracted by a short spurt, where spurting is possible,
but it is a soul-harrowing thing to trundle along a mile of unridable
road, in company with twenty importuning katir-jees, their diminutive
donkeys filling the air with suffocating clouds of dust.  there is nothing
on all this mundane sphere that will so effectually subdue the proud,
haughty spirit of a wheelman, or that will so promptly and completely
snuff out his last flickering ray of dignity; it is one of the pleasantries
of 'cycling through a country where the people have been riding donkeys
and camels since the flood.

a few miles from the village i meet another candidate for medical
treatment; this time it is a woman, among a merry company of donkey-riders,
bound from yuzgat to the salt-mines; they are laughing, singing, and
otherwise enjoying themselves, after the manner of a new england berrying
party.  the woman's affliction, she says, is "fenna ghuz," which, it
appears, is the term used to denote ophthalmia, as well as the "evil-eye;"
but of course, not being a ghuz hakim, i can do nothing more than express
my sympathy.  the fertile valley gradually contracts to a narrow, rocky
defile, leading up into a hilly region, and at five o'clock i reach
tuzgat, a city claiming a population of thirty thousand, that is situated
in a depression among the mountains that can scarcely be called a valley.
i have been three and a half days making the one hundred and thirty miles
from angora.

everybody in yuzgat knows youvanaki effendi tifticjeeoghlou, to whom i
have brought a letter of introduction; and, shortly after reaching town,
i find myself comfortably installed on the cushioned divan of honor in
that worthy old gentleman's large reception room, while half a dozen
serving-men are almost knocking each other over in their anxiety to
furnish me coffee, vishnersu, cigarettes, etc.  they seem determined upon
interpreting the slightest motion of my hand or head into some want which
i am unable to explain, and, fancying thus, they are constantly bobbing
up before me with all sorts of surprising things.  tevfik bey, general
superintendent of the eegie (a company having the monopoly of the tobacco
trade in turkey, for which they pay the government a fixed sum per annum),
is also a guest of tifticjeeoghlou effendi's hospitable mansion, and he
at once despatches a messenger to his yuzgat agent, mr. g.  o.  tchetchian,
a vivacious greek, who speaks english quite fluently.  after that gentleman's
arrival, we soon come to a more perfect understanding of each other all
round, and a very pleasant evening is spent in receiving crowds of
visitors in a ceremonious manner, in which i really seem to be holding
a sort of a levee, except that it is evening instead of morning.  open
door is kept for everybody, and mine host's retinue of pages and serving
men are kept pretty busy supplying coffee right and left; beggars in
their rags are even allowed to penetrate into the reception-room, to sip
a cup of coffee and take a curious peep at the ingilisin and his wonderful
araba, the fame of which has spread like wildfire through the city.  mine
host himself is kept pretty well occupied in returning the salaams of
the more distinguished visitors, besides keeping his eye on the servants,
by way of keeping them well up to their task of dispensing coffee in a
manner satisfactory to his own liberal ideas of hospitality; but he
presides over all with a bearing of easy dignity that it is a pleasure
to witness.  the street in front of the tifticjeeoghlou residence is
swarmed with people next morning; keeping open house is, under the
circumstances, no longer practicable; the entrance gate has to be guarded,
and none permitted to enter but privileged persons.  during the forenoon
the caimacan and several officials call round and ask me to favor them
by riding along a smooth piece of road opposite the municipal konak;
as i intend remaining over here today, i enter no objections, and accompany
them forthwith.  the rabble becomes wildly excited at seeing me emerge
with the bicycle, in company with the caimacan and his staff, for they
know that their curiosity is probably on the eve of being gratified.  it
proves no easy task to traverse the streets, for, like in all oriental
cities, they are narrow, and are now jammed with people.  time and again
the caimacan is compelled to supplement the exertions of an inadequate
force of zaptiehs with his authoritative voice, to keep down the excitement
and the wild shouts of "bin bacalem! bin bacalem." (hide, so that we
can see - an innovation on bin, bin, that has made itself manifest since
crossing the kizil irmak kiver) that are raised, gradually swelling into
the tumultuous howl of a multitude.  the uproar is deafening, and, long
before reaching the place, the caimacan repents having brought me out.
as for myself, i certainly repent having come out, and have still better
reasons for doing so before reaching the safe retreat of tifticjeeo-ghlou
effendi's house, an hour afterward.  the most that the inadequate squad
of zaptiehs present can do, when we arrive opposite the muncipal konak,
is to keep the crowd from pressing forward and overwhelming me and the
bicycle.  they attempt to keep open a narrow passage through the surging
sea of humans blocking the street, for me to ride down; but ten yards
ahead the lane terminates in a mass of fez-crowned heads.  under the
impression that one can mount a bicycle on the stand, like mounting a
horse, the caimacan asks me to mount, saying that when the people see
me mounted and ready to start, they will themselves yield a passage-way.
seeing the utter futility of attempting explanations under existing
conditions, amid the defeaning clamor of " bin bacalem! bin bacalem '"
i mount and slowly pedal along a crooked "fissure" in the compact mass
of people, which the zaptiehs manage to create by frantically flogging
right and left before me.  gaining, at length, more open ground, and the
smooth road continuing on, i speed away from the multitude, and the
caimacan sends one fleet-footed zaptieh after me, with instructions to
pilot me back to tifticjeeoghlou's by a roundabout way, so as to avoid
returning through the crowds.  the rabble are not to be so easily deceived
and shook off as the caimacan thinks, however; by taking various short
cuts, they manage to intercept us, and, as though considering the having
detected and overtaken us in attempting to elude them, justifies them
in taking liberties, their "bin bacalem!" now develops into the imperious
cry of a domineering majority, determined upon doing pretty much as they
please.  it is the worst mob i have seen on the journey, so far; excitement
runs high, and their shouts of "bin bacalem!" can, most assuredly, be
heard for miles.  we are enveloped by clouds of dust, raised by the feet
of the multitude; the hot sun glares down savagely upon us; the poor
zaptieh, in heavy top-boots and a brand-new uniform, heavy enough for
winter, works like a beaver to protect the bicycle, until, with perspiration
and dust, his face is streaked and tattooed like a south sea islander's.
unable to proceed, we come to a stand-still, and simply occupy ourselves
in protecting the bicycle from the crush, and reasoning. with the mob;
but the only satisfaction we obtain in reply to anything we say is " bin
bacalem." one or two pig-headed, obstreperous young men near us, emboldened
by our apparent helplessness, persist in handling the bicycle.  after
being pushed away several times, one of them even assumes a menacing
attitude toward me the last time i thrust his meddlesome hand away.  under
such circumstances retributive justice, prompt and impressive, is the
only politic course to pursue; so, leaving the bicycle to the zaptieh a
moment, in the absence of a stick, i feel justified in favoring the
culprit with, a brief, pointed lesson in the noble art of self-defence,
the first boxing lesson ever given in tuzgat.  in a western mob this would
have been anything but an act of discretion, probably, but with these
people it has a salutary effect; the idea of attempting retaliation is
the farthest of anything from their thoughts, and in all the obstreperous
crowd there is, perhaps, not one but what is quite delighted at either
seeing or hearing of me having thus chastised one of their number, and
involuntarily thanks allah that it didn't happen to be himself.  it would
be useless to attempt a description of how we finally managed, by the
assistance of two more zaptiehs, to get back to tifticjeeoghlou effendi's,
both myself and the zaptieh simply unrecognizable from dust and perspiration.
the zaptieh, having first washed the streaks and tattooing off his face,
now presents himself, with the broad, honest smile of one who knows he
well deserves what he is asking for, and says, "effendi, backsheesh."

there is nothing more certain than that the honest fellow merits backsheesh
from somebody; it is also equally certain that i am the only person from
whom he stands the ghost of a chance of getting any; nevertheless, the
idea of being appealed to for backsheesh, after what i have just undergone,
merely as an act of accommodation, strikes me as just a trifle ridiculous,
and the opportunity of engaging the grinning, good-humored zaptieh in a
little banter concerning the abstract preposterousness of his expectations
is too good to be lost.  so, assuming an air of astonishment, i reply:
"backsheesh! where is my backsheesh.  i should think it's me that deserves
backsheesh if anybody does." this argument is entirely beyond the zaplieh's
child-like comprehension, however; he only understands by my manner that
there is a "hitch" somewhere; and never was there a more broadly good-
humored countenance, or a smile more expressive of meritoriousness, nor
an utterance more coaxing in its modulations than his "e-f-fendi,
backsheesh." as he repeats the appeal; the smile and the modulation is
well worth the backsheesh.

in the afternoon, an officer appears with a note saying that the mutaserif
and a number of gentlemen would like to see me ride inside the municipal
konak grounds.  this i very naturally promise to do, only, under conditions
that an adequate force of zaptiehs be provided.  this the mutaserif readily
agrees to, and once more i venture into the streets, trundling along
under a strong escort of zaptiehs who form a hollow square around me.
the people accumulate rapidly, as we progress, and, by the time we arrive
at the konak gate there is a regular crush.  in spite of the frantic
exertions of my escort, the mob press determinedly forward, in an attempt
to rush inside when the gate is opened; instantly i find myself and
bicycle wedged in among a struggling mass of natives; a cry of "sakin
araba! sakin araba!" (take care! the bicycle!) is raised; the zapliehs
make a supreme effort, the gate is opened, i am fairly carried in, and
the gate is closed.  a couple of dozen happy mortals have gained admittance
in the rush.  hundreds of the better class natives are in the inclosure,
and the walls and neighboring house-tops are swarming with an interested
audience.  there is a small plat of decently smooth ground, upon which i
circle around for a few minutes, to as delighted an audience as ever
collected in bamum's circus.  after the exhibition, the mutaserif eyes
the swarming multitude on the roofs and wall, and looks perplexed; some
one suggests that the bicycle be locked up for the present, and, when
the crowds have dispersed, it can be removed without further excitement.
the mutaserif then places the municipal chamber at my disposal, ordering
an officer to lock it up and give me the key.  later in the afternoon i
am visited by the armenian pastor of yuzgat, and another young armenian,
who can speak a little english, and together we take a strolling peep
at the city.  the american missionaries at kaizarieh have a small book
store here, and the pastor kindly offers me a new testament to carry
along.  we drop in on several armenian shopkeepers, who are introduced
as converts of the mission.  coffee is supplied wherever we call.  while
sitting down a minute in a tailor's stall, a young armenian peeps in,
smiles, and indulges in the pantomime of rubbing his chin.  asking the
meaning of this, i am informed by the interpreter that the fellow belongs
to the barber shop next door, and is taking this method of reminding me
that i stand in need of his professional attentions, not having shaved
of late.  there appears to be a large proportion of circassians in town;
a group of several wild-looking bipeds, armed a la anatolia, ragged and
unkempt-haired for circassians, who are generally respectable in their
personal appearance, approach us, and want me to show them the bicycle,
on the strength of their having fought against the russians in the late
war.  "i think they are liars," says the young armenian, who speaks
english; "they only say they fought against the russians because you
are an englishman, and they think you will show them the bicycle."  some
one comes to me with old coins for sale, another brings a stone with
hieroglyphics on it, and the inevitable genius likewise appears; this
time it is an armenian; the tremendous ovation i have received has filled
his mind with exaggerated ideas of making a fortune, by purchasing the
bicycle and making a two-piastre show out of it.  he wants to know how
much i will take for it.  early daylight finds me astir on the following
morning, for i have found it a desirable thing to escape from town ere
the populace is out to crowd about me.  tifticjeeoghlou effendi's better
half has kindly risen at an unusually early hour, to see me off, and
provides me with a dozen circular rolls of hard bread-rings the size of
rope quoits aboard an atlantic steamer, which i string on igali's cerulean
waist-scarf, and sling over one shoulder.  the good lady lets me out of
the gate, and says, "bin bacalem, effendi." she hasn't seen me ride yet.
she is a motherly old creature, of greek extraction, and i naturally
feel like an ingrate of the meanest type, at my inability to grant her
modest request.  stealing along the side streets, i manage to reach ridable
ground, gathering by the way only a small following of worthy early
risers, and two katir-jees, who essay to follow me on their long-eared
chargers; but, the road being smooth and level from the beginning, i at
once discourage them by a short spurt.  a half-hour's trundling up a steep
hill, and then comes a coastable descent into lower territory.  a
conscription party collected from the neighboring mussulman villages,
en route to samsoon, the nearest black sea port, is met while riding
down this declivity.  in anticipation of the sultan's new uniforms awaiting
them at constantinople, they have provided themselves for the journey
with barely enough rags to cover their nakedness.  they are in high glee
at their departure for stamboul, and favor me with considerable good-natured
chaff as i wheel past.  "human nature is everywhere pretty much alike the
world over," i think to myself.  there is little difference between this
regiment of ragamuffins chaffing me this morning and the well-dressed
troopers of kaiser william, bantering me the day i wheeled out of
strassburg.






chapter xvi.




through the  sivas vilayet into armenia.

it is six hours distant from yuzgat to the large village of koelme, as
distance is measured here, or about twenty-three english miles; but the
road is mostly ridable, and i roll into the village in about three hours
and a half.  just beyond koehne, the roads fork, and the mudir kindly
sends a mounted zaptieh to guide me aright, for fear i shouldn't quite
understand by his pantomimic explanations.  i understand well enough,
though, and the road just here happening to be excellent wheeling, to
the delight of the whole village, i spurt ahead, outdistancing the
zaptieh's not over sprightly animal, and bowling briskly along the right
road within their range of vision, for over a mile.  soon after leaving
koehne my attention is attracted by a small cluster of civilized-looking
tents, pitched on the bank of a running stream near the road, and from
whence issues the joyous sounds of mirth and music.  the road continues
ridable, and i am wheeling leisurely along, hesitating about whether to
go and investigate or not, when a number of persons, in holiday attire,
present themselves outside the tents, and by shouting and gesturing,
invite me to pay them a visit.  it turns out to be a reunion of the yuzgat
branch of the pampasian-pamparsan family - an armenian name whose
representatives in armenia and anatolia, it appears, correspond in
comparative numerical importance to the great and illustrious family of
smiths in the united states.  following - or doubtless, more properly,
setting - a worthy example, they likewise have their periodical reunions,
where they eat, drink, spin yarns, sing, and twang the tuneful lyre in
frolicsome consciousness of always having a howling majority over their
less prolific neighbors.

refreshments in abundance are tendered, and the usual pantomimic
explanations exchanged between us; some of the men have been honoring
the joyful occasion by a liberal patronage of the flowing bowl, and are
already mildly hilarious; stringed instruments are twanged by the musical
members of the great family, while several others, misinterpreting the
inspiration of raki punch for terpsichorean talent are prancing wildly
about the tent.  middle-aged matrons are here in plenty, housewifely
persons, finding their chief enjoyment in catering to the gastronomic
pleasures of the others; while a score or two of blooming maidens stand
coyly aloof, watching the festive merry-makings of the men; their heads
and necks are resplendent with bands and necklaces of gold coins, it
still being a custom of the east to let the female members of a family
wear the surplus wealth about them in the shape of gold ornaments and
jewels, a custom resulting from the absence of safe investments and the
unstability of national affairs.  yuzgat enjoys among neighboring cities
a reputation for beautiful women, and this auspicious occasion gives me
an excellent opportunity for drawing my own conclusions.  it is not fair
perhaps to pass judgment on yuzgat's pretensions, by the damsels of one
family connection, not even the great and numerous pampasian-pamparsan
family, but still they ought to be at least a fair average.  they have
beautiful large black eyes, and usually a luxuriant head of hair; but
their faces arc, on the whole, babyish and expressionless.  the yuzgat
maiden of "sweet sixteen" is a coy, babyish creature, possessed
of a certain doll-like prettiness, but at twenty-three is a rapidly
fading flower, and at thirty is already beginning to get wrinkled and
old.  happening to fall in with this festive gathering this morning is
quite a gratifying and enlivening surprise; besides the music and dancing
and a substantial breakfast of chicken, boiled mutton, and rice pillau,
it gives me an opportunity of witnessing an armenian family reunion under
primitive conditions.  watching over this peaceful and gambolling flock
of armenian lambkins is a lone circassian watchdog; he is of a stalwart,
warlike appearance; and although wearing no arms - except a cavalry sword,
a shorter broad-sword, a dragoon revolver, a two-foot horse-pistol, and
a double-barrelled shot-gun slung at his back - the armenians seem to feel
perfectly safe under his protection.  they probably don't
require any such protection really; they are nevertheless wise in employing
a circassian to guard them, if for nothing else for the sake of freeing
their own unwarlike minds of all disquieting apprehensions, and enjoying
their family reunion in the calm atmosphere of perfect security; some
lawless party passing along the road might peradventure drop in and abuse
their hospitality, or partaking too freely of raki, make themselves
obnoxious, were they unprotected; but with one circassian patrolling the
camp, they are doubly sure against anything of the kind.

these people invite me to remain with them until to-morrow; but of course
i excuse myself from this, and, after spending a very agreeable hour in
their company, take my departure.  the country develops into an undulating
plateau, which is under general cultivation, as cultivation goes in
asiatic turkey.  a number of circassian villages are scattered over this
upland plain; most of them are distant from my road, but many horsemen
are encountered; they ride the finest animals in the country, and one
naturally falls to wondering how they manage to keep so well-dressed and
well-mounted, while rags and poverty and diminutive donkeys seem to be
the well-nigh universal rule among their neighbors.  the circassians
betray more interest in my purely personal affairs - whether i am russian
or english, whither i am bound, etc.- and less interest in the bicycle,
than either turks or armenians, and seem altogether of a more reserved
disposition; i generally have as little conversation with them as possible,
confining myself to letting them know i am english and not russian, and
replying "turkchi binmus" (i don't understand) to other questions;
they have a look about them that makes one apprehensive as to the
disinterestedness of their wanting to know whither i am bound - apprehensive
that their object is to find out where three or four of them could "see
me later." i see but few circassian women; what few i approach sufficiently
near to observe are all more or less pleasant-faced, prepossessing
females; many have blue eyes, which is very rare among their neighbors;
the men average quite as handsome as the women, and they have a peculiar
dare-devil expression of countenance that makes them distinguishable
immediately from either turk or armenian; they look like men who wouldn't
hesitate about undertaking any devilment they felt themselves equal to
for the sake of plunder.  they are very like their neighbors, however,
in one respect; such among them as take any great interest in my
extraordinary outfit find it entirely beyond their comprehension; the
bicycle is a gordian knot too intricate for their semi-civilized minds
to unravel, and there are no alexanders among them to think of cutting
it.  before they recover from their first astonishment i have disappeared.

the road continues for the most part ridable until about 2 p.m., when i
arrive at a mountainous region of rocky ridges, covered chiefly with a
growth of scrub-oak.  upon reaching the summit of one of these ridges, i
observe some distance ahead what appears to be a tremendous field of
large cabbages, stretching away in a northeasterly direction almost to
the horizon of one's vision; the view presents the striking appearance
of large compact cabbage-heads, thickly dotting a well-cultivated area
of clean black loam, surrounded on all sides by rocky, uncultivatable
wilds.  fifteen minutes later i am picking my way through this "cultivated
field," which, upon closer acquaintance, proves to be a smooth lava-bed,
and the "cabbages" are nothing more or less than boulders of singular
uniformity; and what is equally curious, they are all covered with a
growth of moss, while the volcanic bed they repose on is perfectly naked.
beyond this singular area, the country continues wild and mountainous,
with no habitations near the road; and thus it continues until some time
after night-fall, when i emerge upon a few scattering wheat-fields.  the
baying of dogs in the distance indicates the presence of a village
somewhere around; but having plenty of bread on which to sup i once again
determine upon studying astronomy behind a wheat-shock.  it is a glorious
moonlight night, but the altitude of the country hereabouts is not less
than six thousand feet, and the chilliness of the atmosphere, already
apparent, bodes ill for anything like a comfortable night; but i scarcely
anticipate being disturbed by anything save atmospheric conditions.  i
am rolled up in my tent instead of under it, slumbering as lightly as
men are wont to slumber under these unfavorable conditions, when, about
eleven o'clock, the unearthly creaking of native arabas approaching
arouses me from my lethargical condition.  judging from the sounds, they
appear to be making a bee-line for my position; but not caring to
voluntarily reveal my presence, i simply remain quiet and listen.  it
soon becomes evident that they are a party of villagers, coming to load
up their buffalo arabas by moonlight with these very shocks of wheat.
one of the arabas now approaches the shock which conceals my recumbent
form, and where the pale moonbeams are coquettishly ogling the nickel-plated
portions of my wheel, making it conspicuously sciutillant by their
attentions.  hoping the araba may be going to pass by, and that my presence
may escape the driver's notice, i hesitate even yet to reveal myself;
but the araba stops, and i can observe the driver's frightened expression
as he suddenly becomes aware of the presence of strange, supernatural
objects.  at the same moment i rise up in my winding-sheet-like covering;
the man utters a wild yell, and abandoning the araba, vanishes like a
deer in the direction of his companions.  it is an unenviable situation
to find one's self in; if i boldly approach them, these people, not being
able to ascertain my character in the moonlight, would be quite likely
to discharge their fire-arms at me in their fright; if, on the contrary,
i remain under cover, they might also try the experiment of a shot before
venturing to approach the deserted buffaloes, who are complacently chewing
the cud on the spot where their chicken-hearted driver took to his heels.

under the circumstances i think it best to strike off toward the road,
leaving them to draw their own conclusions as to whether i am sheitan
himself, or merely a plain, inoffensive hobgoblin.  but while gathering
up my effects, one heroic individual ventures to approach part way and
open up a shouting inquiry; my answers, though unintelligible to him in
the main, satisfy him that i am at all events a human being; there are
six of them, and in a few minutes after the ignominious flight of the
driver, they are all gathered around me, as much interested and nonplussed
at the appearance of myself and bicycle as a party of nebraska homesteaders
might be had they, under similar circumstances, discovered a turbaned
old turk complacently enjoying a nargileh.  no sooner do their apprehensions
concerning my probable warlike character and capacity become allayed,
than they get altogether too familiar and inquisitive about my packages;
and i detect one venturesome kleptomaniac surreptitiously unfastening a
strap when he fancies i am not noticing.  moreover, laboring under the
impression that i don't understand a word they are saying, i observe
they are commenting in language smacking unmistakably of covetousness,
as to the probable contents of my whitehouse leather case; some think
it is sure to contain chokh para (much money), while others suggest that
i am a postaya (courier), and that it contains letters.  under these
alarming circumstances there is only one way to manage these overgrown
children; that is, to make them afraid of you forthwith; so, shoving the
strap-unfastener roughly away, i imperatively order the whole covetous
crew to "haidi."  without a moment's hesitation they betake themselves
off to their work, it being an inborn trait of their character to
mechanically obey an authoritative command.  following them to their other
arabas, i find that they have brought quilts along, intending, after
loading up to sleep in the field until daylight.  selecting a good heavy
quilt with as little ceremony as though it were my own property, i take
it and the bicycle to another shock, and curl myself up warm and
comfortable; once or twice the owner of the coverlet approaches quietly,
just near enough to ascertain that i am not intending making off with
his property, but there is not the slightest danger of being disturbed
or molested in any way till morning; thus, in this curious round-about
manner, does fortune provide me with the wherewithal to pass a comparatively
comfortable night.  "rather arbitrary proceedings to take a quilt without
asking permission," some might think; but the owner thinks nothing of
the kind; it is quite customary for travellers of their own nation to
help themselves in this way, and the villagers have come to regard it
as quite a natural occurrence.  at daylight i am again on the move, and
sunrise finds me busy making an outline sketch of the ruins of an ancient
castle, that occupies, i should imagine, one of the most impregnable
positions in all asia minor; a regular gibraltar.  it occupies the summit
of a precipitous detached mountain peak, which is accessible only from
one point, all the other sides presenting a sheer precipice of rock; it
forms a conspicuous feature of the landscape for many miles around, and
situated as it is amid a wilderness of rugged brush-covered heights,
admirably suited for ambuscades, it was doubtless a very important
position at one time.  it probably belongs to the byzantine period, and
if the number of old graves scattered among the hills indicate anything,
it has in its day been the theatre of stirring tragedy.  an hour after
leaving the frowning battlements of the grim old relic behind, i arrive
at a cluster of four rock houses, which are apparently occupied by a
sort of a patriarchal family consisting of a turbaned old turk and his
two generations of descendants.  the old fellow is seated on a rock,
smoking a cigarette and endeavoring to coax a little comfort from the
slanting rays of the morning sun, and i straightway approach him and
broach the all-important subject of refreshments.  he turns out to be a
fanatical old gentleman, one of those old-school mussulmans who have
neither eye nor ear for anything but the mohammedan religion; i have
irreverently interrupted him in his morning meditations, it seems, and
he administers a rebuke in the form of a sidewise glance, such as a
pharisee might be expected to bestow on a cannibal islander venturing
to approach him, and delivers himself of two deep-fetched sighs of "allah,
allah!"

anybody would think from his actions that the sanctimonious old man-ikin
(five feet three) had made the pilgrimage to mecca a dozen times, whereas
he has evidently not even earned the privilege of wearing a green turban;
he has neither been to mecca himself during his whole unprofitable life
nor sent a substitute, and he now thinks of gaining a nice numerous
harem, and a walled-in garden, with trees and fountains, cucumbers and
carpooses, in the land of the hara fjhuz kiz, by cultivating the spirit
of fanaticism at the eleventh hour.  i feel too independent this morning
to sacrifice any of the wellnigh invisible remnant of dignity remaining
from the respectable quantity with which i started into asia, for i still
have a couple of the wheaten " quoits" i brought from yuzgat; so, leaving
the ancient mussulman to his meditations, i push on over the hills, when,
coming to a spring, i eat my frugal breakfast, soaking the unbiteable
"quoits" in the water.  after getting beyond this hilly region, i emerge
upon a level plateau of considerable extent, across which very fair
wheeling is found; but before noon the inevitable mountains present
themselves again, and some of the acclivities are trundleable only by
repeating the stair-climbing process of the kara su pass.  necessity
forces me to seek dinner at a village where abject poverty, beyond
anything hitherto encountered, seems to exist.  a decently large fig-leaf,
without anything else, would be eminently preferable to the tattered
remnants hanging about these people, and among the smaller children puris
naturalis is the rule.  it is also quite evident that few of them ever
take a bath; as there is plenty of water about them, this doubtless comes
of the pure contrariness of human nature in the absence of social
obligations.  their religion teaches these people that they ought to bathe
every day; consequently, they never bathe at all.  there is a small
threshing-floor handy, and, taking pity on their wretched condition, i
hesitate not to "drive dull care away" from them for a few minutes, by
giving them an exhibition; not that there is any "dull care" among
them, though, after all; for, in spite of desperate poverty, they know
more contentment than the well-fed, respectably-dressed mechanic of the
western world.  it is, however, the contentment born of not realizing
their own condition, the bliss that comes of ignorance.  they search the
entire village for eatables, but nothing is readily obtainable but bread.
a few gaunt, angular fowls are scratching about, but they have a beruffled,
disreputable appearance, as though their lives had been a continuous
struggle against being caught and devoured; moreover, i don't care to
wait around three hours on purpose to pass judgment on these people's
cooking.  eggs there are none; they are devoured, i fancy, almost before
they are laid.  finally, while making the best of bread and water, which
is hardly made more palatable by the appearance of the people watching
me feed - a woman in an airy, fairy costume, that is little better than
no costume at all, comes forward, and contributes a small bowl of yaort;
but, unfortuntaely, this is old yaort, yaort that is in the sere and
yellow stage of its usefulness as human food; and although these people
doubtless consume it thus, i prefer to wait until something more acceptable
and less odoriferous turns up.  i miss the genial hospitality of the
gentle koords to-day.  instead of heaping plates of pillau, and bowls of
wholesome new yaort, fickle fortune brings me nothing but an exclusive
diet of bread and water.  my road, this afternoon, is a tortuous donkey-trail,
intersecting ravines with well-nigh perpendicular sides, and rocky ridges,
covered with a stunted growth of cedar and scrub-oak.  the higher mountains
round about are heavily timbered with pine and cedar.  a large forest on
a mountain-slope is on fire, and i pass a camp of people who have been
driven out of their permanent abode by the flames.  fortunately, they
have saved everything except their naked houses and their grain.  they
can easily build new houses, and their neighbors will give or lend them
sufficient grain to tide them over till another harvest.  toward sundown
the hilly country terminates, and i descend into a broad cultivated
valley, through which is a very good wagon-road; and i have the additional
satisfaction of learning that it will so continue clear into sivas, a
wagon-road having been made from sivas into this forest to enable the
people to haul wood and building-timber on their arabas.  arriving at a
good-sized and comparatively well-to-do mussulman village, i obtain an
ample supper of eggs and pillau, and, after binning over and over again
until the most unconscionable turk among them all can bring himself to
importune me no more, i obtain a little peace.  supper for two, together
with the tough hill-climbing to-day, and insufficient sleep last night,
produces its natural effect; i quietly doze off to sleep while sitting
on the divan of a small khan, which might very appropriately be called
an open shed.  soon i am awakened; they want me to accommodate them by
binning once more before they retire for the night.  as the moon is shining
brightly, i offer no objections, knowing that to grant the request will
be the quickest way to get rid of their worry.  they then provide me with
quilts, and i spend the night in the khan alone.  i am soon asleep, but
one habitually sleeps lightly under these strange and ever-varying
conditions, and several times i am awakened by dogs invading the khan
and sniffing - about my couch.  my daily experience among these people is
teaching me the commendable habit of rising with the lark; not that i
am an enthusiastic student, or even a willing one - be it observed that
few people are - but it is a case of either turning out and sneaking off
before the inhabitants are astir, or to be worried from one's waking
moments to the departure from the village, and of the two evils one comes
finally to prefer the early rising.  one can always obtain something to
eat before starting by waiting till an hour after sunrise, but i have
had quite enough of these people's importunities to make breakfasting
with them a secondary consideration, and so pull out at early daylight.
the road is exceptionally good, but an east wind rises with the sun and
quickly develops into a stiff breeze that renders riding against it
anything but child's play; no rose is to be expected without a thorn,
nevertheless it is rather aggravating to have the good road and the
howling head-wind happen together, especially in traversing a country
where good roads are the exception instead of the rule.  about eight
o'clock i reach a village situated at the entrance to a rocky defile,
with a babbling brook dancing through the space between its two divisions.
upon inquiring for refreshments, a man immediately orders his wife to
bring me pillau.  for some reason or other - perhaps the poor woman has
none prepared; who knows? - the woman, instead of obeying the command
like a "guid wifey," enters upon a wordy demurrer, whereupon her husband
borrows a hoe-handle from a bystander and advances to chastise her for
daring to thus hesitate about obeying his orders; the woman retreats
precipitately into the house, heaping turkish epithets on her devoted
husband's head.  this woman is evidently a regular termagant, or she would
never have used such violent language to her husband in the presence of
a stranger and the whole village; some day, if she doesn't be more
reasonable, her husband, instead of satisfying his outraged feelings by
chastising her with a hoe-handle, will, in a moment of passion, bid her
begone from his house, which in turkish law constitutes a legal separation;
if the command be given in the presence of a competent witness it is
irrevocable.  seeing me thus placed, as it were, in an embarrassing
situation, another woman - dear, thoughtful creature! - fetches me enough
wheat piilau to feed a mule, and a nice bowl of yaort, off which i make
a substantial breakfast.  near by where i am eating are five industrious
maidens, preparing cracked or broken wheat by a novel and interesting
process, that has hitherto failed to come under my observation; perhaps
it is peculiar to the sivas vilayet, which i have now entered.  a large
rock is hollowed out like a shallow druggist's mortar; wheat is put in,
and several girls (sometimes as many as eight, i am told by the american
missionaries at sivas) gather in a circle about it, and pound the wheat
with light, long-headed mauls or beetles, striking in regular succession,
as the reader has probably seen a gang of circus roustabouts driving
tent-pins.  when i first saw circus tent-pins driven in this manner, a
few years ago, i remember hearing on-lookers remarking it as quite novel
and wonderful how so many could be striking the same peg without their
swinging sledges coming into collision; but that very same performance
has been practised by the maidens hereabout, it seems, from time immemorial-
another proof that there is nothing new under the sun.  ten miles of good
riding, and i wheel into the considerable town of yennikhan, a place
sufficiently important to maintain a public coffee-khan and several small
shops.  here i take aboard a pocketful of fine large pears, and after
wheeling a couple of miles to a secluded spot, halt for the purpose of
shifting the pears from my pocket to where they will be better appreciated.
ere i have finished the second pear, a gentle goatherd, who from an
adjacent hill observed me alight, appears upon the scene and waits around,
with the laudable intention of further enlightening his mind when i
remount.  he is carrying a musical instrument something akin to a flute;
it is a mere hollow tube with the customary finger-holes, but it is blown
at the end; having neither reed nor mouth-piece of any description, it
requires a peculiar sidewise application of the lips, and is not to be
blown readily by a novice.  when properly played, it produces soft,
melodious music that, to say nothing else, must exert a gentle soothing
influence on the wild, turbulent souls of a herd of goats.  the goatherd
offers me a cake of ekmek out of his wallet, as a sort of a i peace - offering,
but thanks to a generous breakfast, music hath more charms at present
than dry ekmek, and handing him a pear, i strike up a bargain by which
he is to entertain me with a solo until i am ready to start, when of
course he will be amply recompensed by seeing me bin; the bargain is
agreed to, and the solo duly played.  east of yennikhan, the road develops
into an excellent macadamized highway, on which i find plenty of genuine
amusement by electrifying the natives whom i chance to meet or overtake.
creeping noiselessly up behind an unsuspecting donkey-driver, until quite
close, i suddenly reveal my presence.  looking round and observing a
strange, unearthly combination, apparently swooping down upon him, the
affrighted katir-jee's first impulse is to seek refuge in flight, not
infrequently bolting clear off the roadway, before venturing upon taking
a second look.  sometimes i simply put on a spurt, and whisk past at a
fifteen mile pace.  looking back, the katir-jee generally seems rooted
to the spot with astonishment, and his utter inability to comprehend.
these men will have marvellous tales to tell in their respective villages
concerning what they saw; unless other bicycles are introduced, the time
the "ingilisiu" went through the country with his wonderful araba will
become a red-letter event in the memory of the people along my route
through asia minor.  crossing the yeldez irmak eiver, on a stone bridge,
i follow along the valley of the head-waters of our old acquaintance,
the kizil irmak, and at three o'clock in the afternoon, roll into sivas,
having wheeled nearly fifty miles to-day, the last forty of which will
compare favorably in smoothness, though not in leveluess, with any forty-
mile stretch i know of in the united states.  prom angora i have brought
a letter of introduction to mr. ernest weakley, a young englishman,
engaged, together with mr. kodigas, a belgian gentleman, for the ottoman
government, in collecting the sivas vilayet's proportion of the russian
indemnity; and i am soon installed in hospitable quarters.  sivas artisans
enjoy a certain amount of celebrity among their compatriots of other
asia minor cities for unusual skilfulness. particularly in making filigree
silver work.  toward evening myself and mr. weakley take a stroll through
the silversmiths' quarters.  the quarters consist of twenty or thirty
small wooden shops, surrounding an oblong court; spreading willows and
a tiny rivulet running through it give the place a semi-rural appearance.
in the little open-front workshops, which might more appropriately be
called stalls, armenian silversmiths are seated cross-legged, some working
industriously at their trade, others gossiping and sipping coffee with
friends or purchasers.

"doesn't it call up ideas of what you conceive the quarters of the old
alchemists to have been hundreds of years ago." asks my companion.
"precisely what i was on the eve of suggesting to you," i reply, and then
we drop into one of the shops, sip coffee with the old silversmith, and
examine his filigree jewelry.  there is nothing denoting remarkable skill
about any of it; an intricate pattern of their jewelry simply represents
a great expenditure of time and asiatic patience, and the finishing of
clasps, rivetting, etc., is conspicuously rough.  sivas was also formerly
a seat of learning; the imposing gates, with portions of the fronts of
the old arabic universities are still standing, with sufficient beautiful
arabesque designs in glazed tile-work still undestroyed, to proclaim
eloquently of departed glories.  the squalid mud hovels of refugees from
the caucasus now occupy the interior of these venerable edifices; ragged
urchins romp with dogs and baby buffaloes where pashas' sons formerly
congregated to learn wisdom from the teachings of their prophet, and now
what remains of the intricate arabesque designs, worked out in small,
bright-colored tiles, that once formed the glorious ceiling of the dome,
seems to look down reproachfully, and yet sorrowfully, upon the wretched
heaps of tezek placed beneath it for shelter.

i am remaining over one day at sivas, and in the morning we call on the
american missionaries.  mr. perry is at home, and hopes i am going to
stay a week, so that they can "sort of make up for the discomforts of
journeying through the country;" mr. hubbard and the ladies of the
mission are out of town, but will be back this evening.  after dinner we
go round to the government konak and call on the vali, hallil eifaat
pasha, whom mr. weakley describes beforehand as a very practical man,
fond of mechanical contrivances; and who would never forgive him if he
allowed me to leave sivas with the bicycle without paying him a visit.
the usual rigmarole of salaams, cigarettes, coffee, compliments, and
questioning are gone through with; the vali is a jolly-faced, good-natured
man, and is evidently much interested in my companion's description of
the bicycle and my journey.  of course i don't forget to praise the
excellence of the road from yennikhan; i can conscientiously tell him
that it is superior to anything i have wheeled over south of the balkans;
the pasha is delighted at hearing this, and beaming joyously over his
spectacles, his fat jolly face a rotund picture of satisfaction, he says
to mr. weakley: "you see, he praises up our roads; and he ought to know,
he has travelled on wagon roads half way round the world." the interview
ends by the vali inviting me to ride the bicycle out to his country
residence this evening, giving the order for a squad of zaptiehs to
escort me out of town at the appointed time.  "the vali is one of the
most energetic pashas in turkey," says mr. weakley, as we take our
departure.  "you would scarcely believe that he has established a small
weekly newspaper here, and makes it self-supporting into the bargain,
would you."  "i confess i don't see how he manages it among these
people," i reply, quite truthfully, for these are anything but newspaper-
supporting people; "how does he manage to make it self-supporting?"
why, he makes every employe of the government subscribe for a certain
number of copies, and the subscription price is kept back out of their
salaries; for instance, the mulazim of zaptiehs would have to take half
a dozen copies, the mutaserif a dozen, etc.; if from any unforeseen cause
the current expenses are found to be more than the income, a few additional
copies are saddled on each 'subscriber.'  "before leaving sivas, i
arrive at the conclusion that hallil eifaat pasha knows just about what's
what; while administering the affairs of the sivas vilayet in a manner
that has gained him the good-will of the population at large, he hasn't
neglected his opportunities at the constantinople end of the rope; more
than one beautiful circassian girl has, i am told, been forwarded to the
sultan's harem by the enterprising and sagacious sivas vali; consequently
he holds "trump cards," so to speak, both in the province and the palace.
promptly at the hour appointed the squad of zaptiehs arrive; mr. weakley
mounts his servant on a prancing arab charger, and orders him to manoeuvre
the horse so as to clear the way in front; the zaptiehs commence their
flogging, and in the middle of the cleared space i trundle the bicycle.
while making our way through the streets, mr. hubbard, who, with the
ladies, has just returned to the city, is encountered on the way to
invite mr. weakley and myself to supper; as he pushes his way through
the crowd and reaches my side, he pronounces it the worst rabble he ever
saw in the streets of sivas, and he has been stationed here over twelve
years.  once clear of the streets, i mount and soon outdistance the crowd,
though still followed by a number of horsemen.  part way out we wait for
the vali's state carriage, in which he daily rides between the city and
his residence.  "while waiting, a terrific squall of wind and dust comes
howling from the direction we are going, and while it is still blowing
great guns, the vali and his mounted escort arrive.  his excellency alights
and examines the columbia with much interest, and then requests me to
ride on immediately in advance of the carriage.  the grade is slightly
against me, and the whistling wind seems to be shrieking a defiance; but
by superhuman efforts, almost, i pedal ahead and manage to keep in front
of his horses all the way.  the distance from sivas is four and a quarter
miles by the cyclometer; this is the first time it has ever been measured.
we are ushered into a room quite elegantly furnished, and light refreshments
served.  observing my partiality for vishner-su, the governor kindly
offers me a flask of the syrup to take along; which i am, however,
reluctantly compelled to refuse, owing to my inability to carry it.  here,
also, we meet djaved bey, the pasha's son, who has recently returned
from constantinople, and who says he saw me riding at prinkipo.  the vali
gets down on his hands and knees to examine the route of my journey on
a map of the world which he spreads out on the carpet; he grows quite
enthusiastic, and exclaims, "wonderful." " very wonderful!" says djaved
bey; "when you get back to america they will-build you a statue." mr.
hubbard has mounted a horse and followed us to the vali's residence, and
at the approach of dusk we take our departure; the wind is favorable for
the return, as is also the gradient; ere my two friends have unhitched
their horses, i mount and am scudding before the gale half a mile away.

"hi hi-hi-hi! you'll never overtake him." the vali shouts enthusiastically
to the two horsemen as they start at full gallop after me, and which
they laughingly repeat to me shortly afterward.  a very pleasant evening
is spent at mr. hubbard's house; after supper the ladies sing "sweet
bye and bye," "home, sweet home," and other melodious reminders of the
land of liberty and song that gave them birth.  everything looks comfortable
and homelike, and they have english ivy inside the dining-room trained
up the walls and partly covering the ceiling, which produces a wonderfully
pleasant effect.  the usual extraordinary rumors of my wonderful speeding
ability have circulated about the city during the day and evening, some
of which have happened to come to the ears of the missionaries.  one story
is that i came from the port of samsoon, a distance of nearly three
hundred miles, in six hours, while an imaginative katir-jee, whom i
whisked past on the road, has been telling the sivas people an exaggerated
story of how a genii had ridden past him with lightning-like speed on a
shining wheel; but whether it was a good or an evil genii he said he
didn't have time to determine, as i went past like a flash and vanished
in the distance.  the missionaries have four hundred scholars attending
their school here at sivas, which would seem to indicate a pretty
flourishing state of affairs.  their recruiting ground is, of i course,
among the armenians, who, though professedly christiana really stand in
more need of regeneration than their mohammedan neighbors.  the
characteristic condition of the average armenian villager's mind is deep,
dense ignorance and moral gloominess; it requires more patience and
perseverance to ingraft a new idea on the unimpressionable trunk of
an armenian villager's intellect than it does to put up second-hand
stove-pipe; and it is a generally admitted fact - i.e., west of the missouri
elver - that anyone capable of setting up three joints of second-hand
stove-pipe without using profane language deserves a seat in paradise.
"come in here a minute," says mr. hubbard, just before our i departure
for the night, leading the way into an adjoining room.; i "here's shirts,
underclothing, socks, handkerchiefs-everything;.! help yourself to
anything you require; i know something about i travelling through this
country myself.  " but not caring to impose too much on good nature, i
content myself with merely pocketing a strong pair of socks, that i
know will come in handy.  i leave the bicycle at the mission over night,
and in the morning, at miss chamberlain's request, i ride round the
school-house yard a few times for the edification of the scholars.  the
greatest difficulty, i am informed, with armenian pupils is to get them
to take sufficient interest in anything to ask questions; it is mainly
because the bicycle will be certain to awaken interest, and excite the
spirit of inquiry among them, that i am requested to ride for their
benefit.  thus is the bicycle fairly recognized as a valuable aid to
missionary work.  moral: let the american and episcopal boards provide
their asia minor and persian missionaries with nickel-plated bicycles;
let them wheel their way into the empty wilderness of the armenian mind,
and. light up the impenetrable moral darkness lurking therein with the
glowing and mist-dispelling orbs of cycle lamps.  messrs.  perry, hubbard,
and weakley accompany me out some distance on horseback, and at parting
i am commissioned to carry salaams to the brethren in china.  this is the
first opportunity that has ever presented of sending greetings overland
to far-off china, they say, and such rare occasions are not to be lightly
overlooked.  they also promise to send word to the erzeroum mission to
expect me; the chances are, however, that i shall reach erzeroum before
their letter; there are no lightning mail trains in asia minor.  the road
eastward from sivas is an artificial highway, and affords reasonably
good wheeling, but is somewhat inferior to the road from yennikhau.
before long i enter a region of low hills, dales, and small lakes, beyond
which the road again descends into the valley of the kizil irmak.  all
day long the roadway averages better wheeling than i ever expected to
find in asiatic turkey; but the prevailing east wind offers strenuous
opposition to my progress every inch of the way along the hundred miles
or so of ridable road from yennikhan to zara, a town at which i arrive
near sundown.  zara is situated at the entrance to a narrow passage between
two mountain spurs, and although the road is here a dead level and the
surface smooth, the wind comes roaring from the gorge with such tremendous
pressure that it is only by extraordinary exertions that i am able to
keep the saddle.

tifticjeeoghlou effendi was a gentleman of greek descent.  at zara i have
an opportunity of seeing and experiencing something of what hospitality
is like among the better class armenians, for i have brought from sivas
a letter of introduction to kirkor-agha tartarian, the most prominent
armenian gentleman in zara.  i have no difficulty whatever in finding the
house, and am at once installed in the customary position of honor, while
five serving-men hover about, ready to wait on me; some take a hand in
the inevitable ceremony of preparing and serving coffee and lighting
cigarettes, while others stand watchfully by awaiting word or look from
myself or mine host, or from the privileged guests that immediately begin
to arrive.  the room is of cedar planking throughout, and is absolutely
without furniture, save the carpeting and the cushioned divan on which
i am seated.  mr. tartarian sits crossed-legged on the carpet to my left,
smoking a nargileh; his younger brother occupies a similar position on
my right, rolling and smoking cigarettes; while the guests, as they
arrive, squat themselves on the carpet in positions varying in distance
from the divan, according to their respective rank and social importance.
no one ventures to occupy the cushioned divan alongside myself, although
the divan is fifteen feet long, and it makes me feel uncomfortably like
the dog in the manger to occupy its whole length alone.  in a farther
corner, and off the slightly raised and carpeted floor on which are
seated the guests, is a small brick fire-place, on which a charcoal fire
is brightly burning, and here mr. vartarian's private kahvay-jee is kept
busily employed in brewing tiny cups of strong black coffee; another
servant constantly visits the fire to ferret out pieces of glowing
charcoal with small pipe-lighting tongs, with which he circulates among
the guests, supplying a light to the various smokers of cigarettes.  a
third youth is kept pretty tolerably busy performing the same office for
mr. vartarian's nargileh, for the gentleman is an inveterate smoker, and
in all turkey there can scarcely be another nargileh requiring so much
tinkering with as his.  all the livelong evening something keeps getting
wrong with that wretched pipe; mine host himself is continually rearranging
the little pile of live coals on top of the dampened tobacco (the tobacco
smoked in a nargileh is dampened, and live coals are placed on top),
taking off the long coiled tube and blowing down it, or prying around
in the tobacco receptacle with an awl-like instrument in his efforts to
make it draw properly, but without making anything like a success; while
his nargileh-boy is constantly hovering over it with a new supply of
live coals.  "job himself could scarcely have been possessed of more
patience," i think at first; but before the evening is over i come to
the conclusion that my worthy host wouldn't exchange that particular
hubble-bubble with its everlasting contrariness for the most perfectly
drawing nargileh in turkey: like certain devotees of the weed among
ourselves, who never seem to be happier than when running a broom-straw
down the stem of a pipe that chronically refuses to draw, so kirkor-agha
vartarian finds his chief amusement in thus tinkering from one week's
end to another with his nargileh.  at the supper table mine host and his
brother both lavish attentions upon me; knives and forks of course there
are none, these things being seldom seen in asia minor, and to a cycler
who has spent the day in pedalling against a stiff breeze, their absence
is a matter of small moment.  i am ravenously hungry, and they both win
my warmest esteem by transferring choice morsels from their own plates
into mine with their fingers.  from what i know of strict haut ton zaran
etiquette, i think they should really pop these tid-bits in my mouth,
and the reason they don't do so is, perhaps, because i fail to open it
in the customary haut ton manner; however, it is a distasteful thing to
be always sticking up for one's individual rights.  a pile of quilts and
mattresses, three feet thick, and feather pillows galore are prepared
for me to sleep on.  an attendant presents himself with a wonderful night-
shirt, on the ample proportions of which are displayed bewildering colors
and figures; and following the custom of the country, shapes himself for
undressing me and assisting me into bed.  this, however, i prefer to do
without assistance, owing to a large stock of native modesty.  i never
fell among people more devoted in their attentions; their only thought
during my stay is to make me comfortable; but they are very ceremonious
and great sticklers for etiquette.  i had intended making my usual early
start, but mine host receives with open disapproval - i fancy even with a
showing of displeasure - my proposition to depart without first partaking
of refreshments, and it is nearly eight o'clock before i finally get
started.  immediately after rising comes the inevitable coffee and early
morning visitors; later an attendant arrives with breakfast for myself
on a small wooden tray.  mr. vartarian occupies precisely the same position,
and is engaged in precisely the same occupation as yesterday evening,
as is also his brother.  no sooner does the hapless attendant make his
appearance with the eatables than these two persons spring simultaneously
to their feet, apparently in a towering rage, and chase him back out of
the room, meanwhile pursuing him with a torrent of angry words; they
then return to their respective positions and respective occupations.
ten minutes later the attendant reappears, but this time bringing a
larger tray with an ample spread for three persons; this, it afterward
appears, is not because mine host and his brother intends partaking of
any, but because it is armenian etiquette to do so, and armenian etiquette
therefore becomes responsible for the spectacle of a solitary feeder
seated at breakfast with dishes and everything prepared for three, while
of the other two, one is smoking a nargileh, the other cigarettes, and
both of them regarding my evident relish of scrambled eggs and cold fowl
with intense satisfaction.

having by this time determined to merely drift with the current of mine
host's intentions concerning the time of my departure, i resume my
position on the divan after breakfasting, simply hinting that i would
like to depart as soon as possible.  to this mr. vartarian complacently
nods assent, and his brother, with equal complacency rolls me a cigarette,
after which a good half-hour is consumed in preparing for me a letter
of introduction to their friend mudura ghana in the village of kachahurda,
which i expect to reach somewhere near noon; mine host dictates while
his brother writes.  visitors continue coming in, and i am beginning to
get a trifle impatient about starting; am beginning in fact to wish all
their nonsensical ceremoniousness at the bottom of tho deep blue sea or
some equally unfathomable quarter, when, at a signal from mr. vartarian
himself, his brother and tho whole roomful of visitors rise simultaneously
to their feet, and equally simultaneously put their hands on their
respective stomachs, and, turning toward me, salaam; mine host then
comes forward, shakes hands, gives me the letter to mudura ghana, and
permits me to depart.  he has provided two zaptiehs to escort me outside
the town, and in a few minutes i find myself bowling briskly along a
beautiful little valley; the pellucid waters of a purling brook dance
merrily alongside an excellent piece of road; birds are singing merrily
in the willow-trees, and dark rocky crags tower skyward immediately
around.  the lovely little valley terminates all too soon, for in fifteen
minutes i am footing it up another mountain; but it proves to be the
entrance gate of a region containing grander pine-clad mountain scenery
than anything encountered outside the sierra nevadas; in fact the famous
scenery of cape horn, california, almost finds its counterpart at one
particular point i traverse this morning; only instead of a central
pacific railway winding around the gray old crags and precipices, the
enterprising sivas vali has built an araba road.  one can scarce resist
the temptation of wheeling down some of the less precipitous slopes, but
it is sheer indiscretion, for the roadway makes sharp turns at points
where to continue straight ahead a few feet too far would launch one
into eternity; a broken brake, a wild "coast" of a thousand feet through
mid-air into the dark depths of a rocky gorge, and the "tour around the
world" would abruptly terminate.  for a dozen miles i traverse a tortuous
road winding its way among wild mountain gorges and dark pine forests;
circassian horsemen are occasionally encountered: it seems the most
appropriate place imaginable for robbers, and i have again been cautioned
against these freebooting mountaineers at sivas.  they eye me curiously,
and generally halt after they have passed, and watch my progress for
some minutes.  once i am overtaken by a couple of them; they follow close
behind me up a mountain slope; they are heavily armed and look capable
of anything, and i plod along, mentally calculating how to best encompass
their destruction with the smith & "wesson, without coming to grief
myself, should their intentions toward me prove criminal.  it is not
exactly comfortable or reassuring to have two armed horsemen, of a people
who are regarded with universal fear and mistrust by everybody around
them, following close upon one's heels, with the disadvantage of not
being able to keep an eye on their movements; however, they have little
to say; and as none of them attempt any interference, it is not for me
to make insinuations against them on the barren testimony of their outward
appearance and the voluntary opinions of their neighbors.

my route now leads up a rocky ravine, the road being fairly under cover
of over-arching rocks at times, thence over a billowy region of mountain
summits-an elevated region of pine-clad ridges and rocky peaks-to descend
again into a cultivated country of undulating hills and dales, checkered
with fields of grain.  these low rolling hills appear to be in a higher
state of cultivation than any district i have traversed in asia minor;
from points of vantage the whole country immediately around looks like
a swelling sea of golden grain; harvesting is going merrily on; men and
women are reaping side by side in the fields, and the songs of the women
come floating through the air from all directions.  they are armenian
peasants, for i am now in armenia proper; the inhabitants of this
particular locality impress me as a light hearted, industrious people;
they have an abundant harvest, and it is a pleasure to stand and see
them reap, and listen to the singing of the women; moreover they are
more respectably clothed than the lower class natives round about them,
barring, of course, our unfathomable acquaintances, the circassians.

toward the eastern extremity of this peaceful, happy scene is the village
of kachahurda, which i reach soon after noon, and where resides mfrdura
ghana, to whom i bring a letter.  picturesquely speaking, kachahurda is
a disgrace to the neighborhood in which it stands; its mud hovels are
combined cow-pens, chicken-coops, and human habitations, and they are
bunched up together without any pretence to order or regularity; yet the
light-hearted, decently-clad people, whose songs come floating from the
harvest-fields, live contentedly in this and other equally wretched
villages round about.  mudura ghana provides me with a repast of bread
and yaort, and endeavors to make my brief halt comfortable.  while i am
discussing these refreshments, himself and another unwashed, unkempt old
party come to high, angry words about me; but whatever it is about i
haven't the slightest idea.  mine host seems a regular old savage when
angry.  he is the happy possessor of a pair of powerful lungs, which are
ably seconded by a foghorn voice, and he howls at the other man like an
enraged bull.  the other man doesn't seem to mind it, though, and keeps
up his end of the controversy - or whatever it is - in a comparatively cool
and aggravating manner, that seems to feed mudura ghana's righteous
wrath, until i quite expect to see that outraged person reach down one
of the swords off the wall and hack his opponent into sausage-meat.  once
i venture to inquire, as far as one can inquire by pantomime, what they
are quarrelling so violently about me for, being really inquisitive to
find out they both immediately cease hostilities to assure me that it
is nothing for which i am in any way personally responsible; and then
they straightway fall to glaring savagely at each other again, and renew
their vocal warfare more vigorously, if anything, from having just drawn
a peaceful breath.  mine host of kachahurda can scarcely be called a very
civilized or refined individual; he has neither the gentle kindliness
of kirkoragha vartarian, nor the dignified, gentlemanly bearing of
tifticjeeoghlou effendi; but he grabs a club, and roaring like the hoarse
whistle of a mississippi steamboat, chases a crowd of villagers out of
the room who venture to come in on purpose to stare rudely at his guest;
and for this charitable action alone he deserves much credit; nothing
is so annoying as to have these unwashed crowds standing gazing and
commenting while one is eating.  a man is sent with me to direct me aright
where the road forks, a mile or so from the village; from the forks it
is a newly made road, in fact, unfinished; it resembles a ploughed field
for looseness and i depth; and when, in addition to this, one has to
climb a gradient of twenty metres to the hundred, a bicycle is anything
but a comforting thing to possess.  the country becomes broken and more
mountainous than ever, and the road winds about fearfully.  often a part
of the road that is but a mile away as the crow flies requires an hour's
steady going to reach it; but the mountain scenery is glorious.  occasionally
i round a point, or reach a summit, from whence a magnificent and
comprehensive view bursts upon the vision, and it really requires an
effort to tear one's self away, realizing that in all probability i shall
never see it again.  at one point i seem to be overlooking a vast
amphitheatre which encompasses within itself the physical geography of
a continent.  it is traversed by whole mountain-ranges of lesser degree;
it contains tracts of stony desert and fertile valley, lakes, and a
river, not excepting even the completing element of a fine forest, and
encompassing it round about, like an impenetrable palisade protecting
it against invasion, are scores of grand old mountains - grim sentinels
that nothing can overcome.  the road, though still among the mountains,
is now descending in a general way from the elevated divide, down toward
enderes and the valley of the gevmeili chai river; and toward evening i
enter an armenian village.

the custom from here eastward appears to be to have the threshing-floors
in or near the village; there are sometimes several different floors,
and when they are winnowing the grain on windy days the whole village
becomes covered with an inch or two of chaff.  i am glad to find these
threshing-floors in the villages, because they give me an excellent
opportunity to ride and satisfy the people, thus saving me no end of
worry and annoyance.

the air becomes chilly after sundown, and i am shown into a close room
containing one small air-hole, and am provided with a quilt and pillow.
later in the evening a turkish bey arrives with an escort of zaptiehs
and occupies the same apartment, which would seem to be a room especially
provided for the accommodation of travellers.  the moment the officer
arrives, behold, there is a hurrying to and fro of the villagers to sweep
out the room, kindle a fire to brew his coffee, and to bring him water
and a vessel for his ablutions before saying his evening prayers.  cringing
senility characterizes the demeanor of these armenian villagers toward
the turkish officer, and their hurrying hither and thither to supply him
ere they are asked looks to me wonderfully like a "propitiating of the
gods." the bey himself seems to be a pretty good sort of a fellow,
offering me a portion of his supper, consisting of bread, olives, and
onions; which, however, i decline, having already ordered eggs and pillau
of a villager.  the bey's company is highly acceptable, since it saves
me from the annoyance of being surrounded by the usual ragged, unwashed
crowd during the evening, and secures me a refreshing sleep, undisturbed
by visions of purloined straps or moccasins.  he appears to be a very
pious mussulman; after washing his head, hands, and feet, he kneels
toward mecca on the wet towel, and prays for nearly twenty minutes by
my timepiece; and his sighs of allah! are wonderfully deep-fetched,
coming apparently from clear down in his stomach.  while he is thus
devotionally engaged, his two zaptiehs stand respectfully by, and divide
their time between eying myself and the bicycle with wonder and the bey
with mingled reverence and awe.  at early dawn i steal noiselessly away,
to avoid disturbing the peaceful slumbers of the bey.  for several miles
my road winds around among the foot-hills of the range i crossed yesterday,
but following a gradually widening depression, which finally terminates
in the gevmeili chai valley; and directly ahead and below me lies the
considerable town of enderes, surrounded by a broad fringe of apple-orchards,
and walnut and jujube groves.  here i obtain a substantial breakfast of
turkish kabobs (tid-bits of mutton, spitted on a skewer, and broiled
over a charcoal fire) at a public eating khan, after which the mudir
kindly undertakes to explain to me the best route to erzingan, giving
me the names of several villages to inquire for as a guidance.  while
talking to the mudir, mr. pronatti, an italian engineer in the employ
of the sivas vali, makes his appearance, shakes hands, reminds me that
italy has recently volunteered assistance to england in the soudan
campaign, and then conducts me to his quarters in another part of the
town.  mr. pronatti can speak almost any language but english; i speak
next to nothing but english; nevertheless, we manage to converse quite
readily, for, besides proficiency in pantomimic language acquired by
daily practice, i have necessarily picked up a few scattering words of
the vernacular of the several countries traversed on the tour.  while
discussing a nice ripe water-melon with this gentleman, several respectable-
looking people enter and introduce themselves through mr. pronatti as
osmanli turks, not armenians, expecting me to regard them more favorably
on that account.  soon afterward a party of armenians arrive, and take
labored pains to impress upon me that they are not turks, but christian
armenians.  both parties seem desirous of winning my favorable opinion.
one party thinks the surest plan is to let me know that they are turks;
the others, to let me know that they are not turks.  "i have told both
parties to go to gehenna," says my italian friend.  "these people will
worry you to death with their foolishness if you make the mistake of
treating them with consideration."

donning an indian pith-helmet that is three sizes too large, and wellnigh
conceals his features, mr. pronatti orders his horse, and accompanies
me some distance out, to put me on the proper course to erzingan.  my
route from enderes leads along a lovely fertile valley, between lofty
mountain ranges; an intricate network of irrigating ditches, fed by,
mountain streams, affords an abundance of water for
wheat-fields, vineyards, and orchards; it is the best, and yet the worst
watered valley i ever saw - the best, because the irrigating ditches are
so numerous; the worst, because most of them are overflowing and converting
my road into mud-holes and shallow pools.  in the afternoon i reach
somewhat higher ground, where the road becomes firmer, and i bowl merrily
along eastward, interrupted by nothing save the necessity of dismounting
and shedding my nether garments every few minutes to ford a broad, swift
feeder to the lesser ditches lower down the valley.  in this fructiferous
vale my road sometimes leads through areas of vineyards surrounded by
low mud walls, where grapes can be had for the reaching, and where the
proprietor of an orchard will shake down a shower of delicious yellow
pears for whatever you like to give him, or for nothing if one wants him
to.  i suppose these villagers have established prices for their commodities
when dealing with each other, but they almost invariably refuse to charge
me anything; some will absolutely refuse any payment, and my only plan
of recompensing them is to give money to the children; others accept,
with as great a show of gratitude as if i were simply giving it to them
without having received an equivalent, whatever i choose to give.

the numerous irrigating ditches have retarded my progress to an appreciable
extent to-day, so that, notwithstanding the early start and the absence
of mountain-climbing, my cyclometer registers but a gain of thirty-seven
miles, when, having continued my eastward course for some time after
nightfall, and failing to reach a village, i commence looking around for
somewhere to spend the night.  the valley of the gevmeili chai has been
left behind, and i am again traversing a narrow, rocky pass between the
hills.  among the rocks i discover a small open cave, in which i determine
to spend the night.  the region is elevated, and the night air chilly;
so i gather together some dry weeds and rubbish and kindle a fire.  with
something to cook and eat, and a pair of blankets, i could have spent a
reasonably comfortable night; but a pocketful of pears has to suffice
for supper, and when the unsubstantial fuel is burned away, my airy
chamber on the bleak mountain-side and the thin cambric tent affords
little protection from the insinuating chilliness of the night air.
variety is said to be the spice of life; no doubt it is, under certain
conditions, but i think it all depends on the conditions whether it is
spicy or not spicy.  for instance, the vicissitudes of fortune that favor
me with bread and sour milk for dinner, a few pears for supper, and a
wakeful night of shivering discomfort in a cave, as the reward of wading
fifty irrigating ditches and traversing thirty miles of ditch-bedevilled
donkey-trails during the day, may look spicy, and even romantic, from a
distance; but when one wakes up in a cold shiver about 1.30a.m. and
realizes that several hours of wretchedness are before him, his waking
thoughts are apt to be anything but thoughts complimentary of the spiciness
of the situation.  inshallah! fortune will favor me with better dues to-
morrow; and if not to-morrow, then the next day, or the next.






chapter xvii.




through erzingan and erzeroum.

for mile after mile, on the following morning, my route leads through
broad areas strewn with bowlders and masses of rock that appear to have
been brought down from the adjacent mountains by the annual spring floods,
caused by the melting winter's snows; scattering wheat-fields are observed
here and there on the higher patches of ground, which look like small
yellow oases amid the desert-like area of loose rocks surrounding them.
squads of diminutive donkeys are seen picking their weary way through
the bowlders, toiling from the isolated fields to the village threshing-floors
beneath small mountains of wheat-sheaves.  sometimes the donkeys themselves
are invisible below the general level of the bowlders, and nothing is
to be seen but the head and shoulders of a man, persuading before him
several animated heaps of straw.  small lakes of accumulated surface-water
are passed in depressions having no outlet; thickets and bulrushes are
growing around the edges, and the surfaces of some are fairly black with
multitudes of wild-ducks.  soon i reach an armenian village; after
satisfying the popular curiosity by riding around their threshing-floor,
they bring me some excellent wheat-bread, thick, oval cakes that are
quite acceptable, compared with the wafer-like sheets of the past several
days, and five boiled eggs.  the people providing these will not accept
any direct payment, no doubt thinking my having provided them with the
only real entertainment most of them ever saw, a fair equivalent for
their breakfast; but it seems too much like robbing paupers to accept
anything from these people without returning something, so i give money
to the children.  these villagers seem utterly destitute of manners,
standing around and watching my efforts to eat soft-boiled eggs with a
pocket-knife with undisguised merriment.  i inquire for a spoon, but they
evidently prefer to extract amusement from watching my interesting
attempts with the pocket-knife.  one of them finally fetches a clumsy
wooden ladle, three times broader than an egg, which, of course is worse
than nothing.  i now traverse a mountainous country with a remarkably
clear atmosphere.  the mountains are of a light creamcolored shaly
composition; wherever a living stream of water is found, there also is
a village, with clusters of trees.  from points where a comprehensive
view is obtainable the effect of these dark-green spots, scattered here
and there among the whitish hills, seen through the clear, rarefied
atmosphere, is most beautiful.  it seems a peculiar feature of everything
in the east - not only the cities themselves, but even of the landscape -
to look beautiful and enchanting at a distance; but upon a closer approach
all its beauty vanishes like an illusory dream.  spots that from a distance
look, amid their barren, sun-blistered surroundings, like lovely bits
of fairyland, upon closer investigation degenerate into wretched habitations
of a ragged, poverty-stricken people, having about them a few neglected
orchards and vineyards, and a couple of dozen straggling willows and
jujubes.

for many hours again to-day i am traversing mountains, mountains, nothing
but mountains; following tortuous camel-paths far up their giant slopes.
sometimes these camel-paths are splendidly smooth, and make most excellent
riding.  at one place, particularly, where they wind horizontally around
the mountain-side, hundreds of feet above a village immediately below,
it is as though the villagers were in the pit of a vast amphitheatre,
and myself were wheeling around a semicircular platform, five hundred
feet above them, but in plain view of them all.  i can hear the wonder-struck
villagers calling each other's attention to the strange apparition, and
can observe them swarming upon the house-tops.  what wonderful stories
the inhabitants of this particular village will have to recount to their
neighbors, of this marvellous sight, concerning which their own unaided
minds can give no explanation!

noontide comes and goes without bringing me any dinner, when i emerge
upon a small, cultivated plateau, and descry a coterie of industrious
females reaping together in a field near by, and straightway turn my
footsteps thitherward with a view of ascertaining whether they happen
to have any eatables.  no sooner do they observe me trundling toward them
than they ingloriously flee the field, thoughtlessly leaving bag and
baggage to the tender mercies of a ruthless invader.  among their effects
i find some bread and a cucumber, which i forthwith confiscate, leaving
a two and a half piastre metallique piece in its stead; the affrighted
women are watching me from the safe distance of three hundred yards;
when they return and discover the coin they will wish some 'cycler would
happen along and frighten them away on similar conditions every day.
later in the afternoon i find myself wandering along the wrong trail;
not a very unnatural occurrence hereabout, for since leaving the valley
of the gevmeili chai, it has been difficult to distinguish the erzingan
trail from the numerous other trails intersecting the country in every
direction.  on such a journey as this one seems to acquire a certain
amount of instinct concerning roads; certain it is, that i never traverse
a wrong trail any distance these days ere, without any tangible evidence
whatever, i feel instinctively that i am going astray.  a party of camel-
drivers direct me toward the lost erzingan trail, and in an hour i am
following a tributary of the ancient lycus river, along a valley where
everything looks marvellously green and refreshing; it is as though i
have been suddenly transferred into an entirely different country.

this innovation from barren rocks and sun-baked shale to a valley where
the principal crops seem to be alfalfa and clover, and which is flanked
on the south by dense forests of pine, encroaching downward from the
mountain slopes clear on to the level greensward, is rather an agreeable
surprise; the secret of the magic change does not remain a secret long;
it reveals itself in the shape of sundry broad snow-patches still lingering
on the summits of a higher mountain range beyond.  these pine forests,
the pleasant greensward, and the lingering snow-banks, tell an oft-repeated
tale; they speak eloquently of forests preserved and the winter snow-fall
thereby increased; they speak all the more eloquently because of being
surrounded by barren, parched-up hills which, under like conditions,
might produce similar happy results, but which now produce nothing.  while
traversing this smiling valley i meet a man asleep on a buffalo araba;
an irrigating ditch runs parallel with the road and immediately alongside;
the meek-eyed buffaloes swerve into the ditch in deference to their awe
of tho bicycle, arid upset their drowsy driver into the water.  the mail
evidently stands in need of a bath, but somehow he doesn't seeiu to
appreciate it; perhaps it happened a trifle too impromptu, as it were,
to suit his easy-going asiatic temperament.  he returns my rude, unsympathetic
smile with a prolonged stare of bewilderment, but says nothing.

soon i meet a boy riding on a donkey, and ask him the postaya distance
to erzingan; the youth looks frightened half out of his. senses, but
manages to retain sufficient presence of mind to elevate one finger, by
which i understand him to mean that it is one hour, or about four miles.
accordingly i pedal perseveringly ahead, hoping to reach the city before
dusk, at the same time feeling rather surprised at finding it so near,
as i haven't been expecting to reach there before to-morrow.  five miles
beyond where i met the boy, and just after sundown, i overtake some
katir-jees en route to erzingan with donkey-loads of grain, and ask them
the same question.  from them i learn that instead of one, it is not less
than twelve hours distant, also that the trail leads over a fearfully
mountainous country.  nestling at the base of the mountains, a short
distance to the northward, is the large village of merriserriff, and not
caring to tempt the fates into giving me another supper-less night in a
cold, cheerless cave, i wend my way thither.

fortune throws me into the society of an armenian whose chief anxiety
seems to be, first, that i shall thoroughly understand that he is an
armenian, and not a mussulman; and, secondly, to hasten me into the
presence of the mudir, who is a mussulman, and a turkish bey, in order
that he may bring himself into the mudir's favorable notice by personally
introducing me as a rare novelty on to his (the mudir's) threshing-floor.
the official and a few friends are sipping coffee in one corner of the
threshing floor, and, although i don't much relish my position of the
armenian's puppet-show, i give the mudir an exhibition of the bicycle's
use, in the expectation that he will invite me to remain his guest over
night.

he proves uncourteous, however, not even inviting me to partake of coffee;
evidently, he has become so thoroughly accustomed to the abject servility
of the armenians about him - who would never think of expecting reciprocating
courtesies from a social superior - that he has unconsciously come to
regard everybody else, save those whom he knows as his official superiors,
as tarred, more or less, with the same feather.  in consequence of this
belief i am not a little gratified when, upon the point of leaving the
threshing-floor, an occasion offers of teaching him different.

other friends of the mudir's appear upon the scene just as i am leaving,
and he beckons me to come back and bin for the enlightenment of the new
arrivals.  the armenian's countenance fairly beams with importance at
thus being, as it were, encored, and the collected villagers murmur their
approval; but i answer the mudir's beckoned invitation by a negative
wave of the hand, signifying that i can't bother with him any further.
the common herd around regard this self-assertive reply with open-mouthed
astonishment, as though quite too incredible for belief; it seems to
them an act of almost criminal discourtesy, and those immediately about
me seem almost inclined to take me back to the threshing-floor like a
culprit.  but the mudir himself is not such a blockhead but that he
realizes the mistake he has made.  he is too proud to acknowledge it,
though; consequently his friends miss, perhaps, the only opportunity in
their uneventful lives of seeing a bicycle ridden.  owing to my ignorance
of the vernacular, i am compelled to drift more or less with the tide
of circumstances about me, upon entering one of these villages, for
accommodation, and make the best of whatever capricious chance provides.
my armenian "manager " now delivers me into the hands of one of his
compatriots, from whom i obtain supper and a quilt, sleeping, from a not
over extensive choice, on some straw, beneath the broad eaves of a log
granary adjoining the house.

i am for once quite mistaken in making an early, breakfastless start,
for it proves to be eighteen weary miles over a rocky mountain pass
before another human habitation is reached, a region of jagged rocks,
deep gorges, and scattered pines.  fortunately, however, i am not destined
to travel the whole eighteen miles in a breakfastless condition-not quite
a breakfastless condition.  perhaps half the distance is traversed, when,
while trundling up the ascent, i meet a party of horsemen, a turbaned
old turk, with an escort of three zaptiehs, and another traveller, who
is keeping pace with them for company and safety.  the old turk asks me
to bin bacalem, supplementing the request by calling my attention to his
turban, a gorgeously spangled affair that would seem to indicate the
wearer to be a personage of some importance; i observe, also that the
butt of his revolver is of pearl inlaid with gold, another indication
of either rank or opulence.  having turned about and granted his request,
i in turn call his attention to the fact that mountain climbing on an
empty stomach is anything but satisfactory or agreeable, and give him a
broad hint by inquiring how far it is before ekmek is obtainable.  for
reply, he orders a zaptieh to produce a wheaten cake from his saddle-bags,
and the other traveller voluntarily contributes three apples, which he
ferrets out from the ample folds of his kammerbund and off this i make
a breakfast.  toward noon, the highest elevation of the pass is reached,
and i commence the descent toward the erzingan valley, following for a
number of miles the course of a tributary of the western fork of the
euphrates, known among the natives in a general sense as the "frat;"
this particular branch is locally termed the kara su, or black water.
the stream and my road lead down a rocky defile between towering hills
of rock and slaty formation, whose precipitous slopes vegetable nature
seems to shun, and everything looks black and desolate, as though some
blighting curse had fallen upon the place.  up this same rocky passage-way,
eight summers ago, swarmed thousands of wretched refugees from the seat
of war in eastern armenia; small oblong mounds of loose rocks and bowlders
are frequently observed all down the ravine, mournful reminders of one
of the most heartrending phases of the armenian campaign; green lizards
are scuttling about among the rude graves, making their habitations in
the oblong mounds.  about two o'clock i arrive at a road-side khan, where
an ancient osmanli dispenses feeds of grain for travellers' animals, and
brews coffee for the travellers themselves, besides furnishing them with
whatever he happens to possess in the way of eatables to such as are
unfortunately obliged to patronize his cuisine or go without anything;
among this latter class belongs, unhappily, my hungry self.  upon inquiring
for refreshments the khan-jee conducts me to a rear apartment and exhibits
for my inspection the contents of two jars, one containing the native
idea of butter and the other the native conception of a soft variety of
cheese; what difference is discoverable between these two kindred products
is chiefly a difference in the degree
of rancidity and odoriferousuess, in which respect the cheese plainly
carries off the honors; in fact these venerable and esteemable qualities
of the cheese are so remarkably developed that after one cautious peep
into its receptacle i forbear to investigate their comparative excellencies
any further; but obtaining some bread and a portion of the comparatively
mild and inoffensive butter, i proceed to make the best of circumstances.
the old khan-jee proves himself a thoughtful, considerate landlord, for
as i eat he busies himself picking the most glaringly conspicuous hairs
out of my butter with the point of his dagger.  one is usually somewhat
squeamish regarding hirsute butter, but all such little refinements of
civilized life as hairless butter or strained milk have to be winked at
to a greater or less extent in asiatic travelling, especially when
depending solely on what happens to turn up from one meal to another.
the narrow, lonely defile continues for some miles eastward from the
khan, and ere i emerge from it altogether i encounter a couple of ill-
starred natives, who venture upon an effort to intimidate me into yielding
up my purse.  a certain mahmoud ali and his band of enterprising freebooters
have been terrorizing the villagers and committing highway robberies of
late around the country; but from the general appearance of these two,
as they approach, i take them to be merely villagers returning home from
erzingan afoot.  they are armed with circassian guardless swords and
flint-lock horse-pistols; upon meeting they address some question to me
in turkish, to which i make my customary reply of tarkchi binmus; one
of them then demands para (money) in a manner that leaves something of
a doubt whether he means it for begging, or is ordering me to deliver.
in order to the better discover their intentions, i pretend not to
understand, whereupon the spokesman reveals their meaning plain enough
by reiterating the demand in a tone meant to be intimidating, and half
unsheatns his sword in a significant manner.  intuitively the precise
situation of affairs seems to reveal itself in a moment; they are but
ordinarily inoffensive villagers returning from erzingan, where they
have sold and squandered even the donkeys they rode to town; meeting me
alone, and, as they think in the absence of outward evidence that i am
unarmed, they have become possessed ot tue idea of retrieving their
fortunes by intimidating me out of money.  never were men more astonished
and taken aback at finding me armed, and they both turn pale and fairly
shiver with fright as i produce the smith & wesson from its inconspicuous
position at my hip, and hold it on a level with the bold spokesman's
head; they both look as if they expected their last hour had arrived and
both seem incapable either of utterance or of running away; in fact,
their embarrassment is so ridiculous that it provokes a smile and it is
with anything but a threatening or angry voice that i bid them haidy.
the bold highwaymen seem only too thankful of a chance to "haidy," and
they look quite confused, and i fancy even ashamed of themselves, as
they betake themselves off up the ravine.  i am quite as thankful as
themselves at getting off without the necessity of using my revolver,
for had i killed or badly wounded one of them it would probably have
caused no end of trouble or vexatious delay, especially in case they
prove to be what i take them for, instead of professional robbers;
moreover, i might not have gotten off unscathed myself, for while their
ancient flint-locks were in all probability not even loaded, being worn
more for appearances by the native than anything else, these fellows
sometimes do desperate work with their ugly and ever-handy swords when
cornered up, in proof of which we have the late dastardly assault on the
british consul at erzeroum, of which we shall doubtless hear the particulars
upon reaching that city.  before long the ravine terminates, and i emerge
upon the broad and smiling erzingan valley; at the lower extremity of
the ravine the stream has cut its channel through an immense depth of
conglomerate formation, a hundred feet of bowlders and pebbles cemented
together by integrant particles which appear to have been washed down
from the mountains-probably during the subsidence of the deluge, for
even if that great catastrophe were a comparatively local occurrence,
instead of a universal flood, as some profess to believe, we are now
gradually creeping up toward ararat, so that this particular region was
undoubtedly submerged.  what appear to be petrified chunks of wood are
interspersed through the mass.  there is nothing new under the sun, they
say; peradventure they may be sticks of cooking-stove wood indignantly
cast out of the kitchen window of the ark by mrs. noah, because the
absent-minded patriarch habitually persisted in cutting them three inches
too long for the stove; who knows.  i now wheel along a smooth, level
road leading through several orchard-environed villages; general cultivation
and an atmosphere of peace and plenty seems to pervade the valley, which,
with its scattering villages amid the foliage of their orchards, looks
most charming upon emerging from the gloomy environments of the rock-ribbed
and verdureless ravine; a fitting background is presented on the south
by a mountain-chain of considerable elevation, upon the highest peaks
of which still linger tardy patches of snow.

since the occupation of ears by the russians, the military mantle of that
important fortress has fallen upon erzeroum and erzingan; the booming
of cannon fired in honor of the sultan's birthday is awakening the echoes
of the rock-ribbed mountains as i wheel eastward down the valley, and
within about three miles of the city i pass the headquarters of the
garrison.  long rows of hundreds of white field-tents are ranged about
the position on the level greensward; the place presents an animated
scene, with the soldiers, some in the ordinary blue, trimmed with red,
others in cool, white uniforms especially provided for the summer, but
which they are not unlikely to be found also wearing in winter, owing
to the ruinous state of the ottoman exchequer, and one and all wearing
the picturesque but uncomfortable fez; cannons are booming, drums beating,
and bugles playing.  from the military headquarters to the city is a
splendid broad macadam, converted into a magnificent avenue by rows of
trees; it is a general holiday with the military, and the avenue is alive
with officers and soldiers going and returning between erzingan and the
camp.  the astonishment of the valiant warriors of islam as i wheel briskly
down the thronged avenue can be better imagined than described; the
soldiers whom i pass immediately commence yelling at their comrades ahead
to call their attention, while epauletted officers forget for the moment
their military dignity and reserve as they turn their affrighted chargers
around and gaze after me, stupefied with astonishment; perhaps they are
wondering whether i am not some supernatural being connected in some way
with the celebration of the sultan's birthday - a winged messenger, perhaps,
from the prophet.  upon reaching the city i repair at once to the large
customhouse caravanserai and engage a room for the night.  the proprietor
of the rooms seems a sensible fellow, with nothing of the inordinate
inquisitiveness of the average native about him, and instead of throwing
the weight of his influence and his persuasive powers on the side of the
importuning crowd, he authoritatively bids them "haidy!" locks the
bicycle in my room, and gives me the key.  the erzingan caravanserai - and
all these caravanserais are essentially similar - is a square court-yard
surrounded by the four sides of a two-storied brick building; the ground-
floor is occupied by the offices of the importers of foreign goods and
the customhouse authorities; the upper floor is divided into small rooms
for the accommodation of travellers and caravan men arriving with goods
from trebizond.  sallying forth in search of supper, i am taken in tow
by a couple of armenians, who volunteer the welcome information that
there is an "americanish hakim" in the city; this intelligence is an
agreeable surprise, for erzeroum is the nearest place in which i have
been expecting to find an english-speaking person.  while searching about
for the hakim, we pass near the zaptieh headquarters; the officers are
enjoying their nargileh in the cool evening air outside the building,
and seeing an englishman, beckon us over.  they desire to examine my
teskeri, the first occasion on which it has been officially demanded
since landing at ismidt, although i have voluntarily produced it on
previous occasions, and at sivas requested the vali to attach his seal
and signature; this is owing to the proximity of erzingan to the russian
frontier, and the suspicions that any stranger may be a, subject of the
czar, visiting the military centres for sinister reasons.  they send an
officer with me to hunt up the resident pasha; that worthy and enlightened
personage is found busily engaged in playing a game of chess with a
military officer, and barely takes the trouble to glance at the proffered
passport: "it is vised by the sivas vali," he says, and lackadaisically
waves us adieu.  upon returning to the zaptieh station, a quiet, unassuming
american comes forward and introduces himself as dr. van nordan, a
physician formerly connected with the persian mission.  the doctor is a
spare-built and not over-robust man, and would perhaps be considered by
most people as a trifle eccentric; instead of being connected with any
missionary organization, he nowadays wanders hither and thither, acquiring
knowledge and seeking whom he can persuade from the error of their ways,
meanwhile supporting himself by the practice of his profession.  among
other interesting things spoken of, he tells me something of his recent
journey to khiva (the doctor pronounces it "heevah"); he was surprised,
he says, at finding the khivans a mild-mannered and harmless sort of
people, among whom the carrying of weapons is as much the exception as
it is the rule in asiatic turkey.  doubtless the fact of khiva being under
the russian government has something to do with the latter otherwise
unaccountable fact.  after supper we sit down on a newly arrived bale of
manchester calico in the caravanserai court, cross one knee and whittle
chips like michigan grangers at a cross-roads post-office, and spend two
hours conversing on different topics.  the good doctor's mind wanders as
naturally into serious channels as water gravitates to its level; when
i inquire if he has heard anything of the whereabout of mahmoud ali and
his gang lately, the pious doctor replies chiefly by hinting what a
glorious thing it is to feel prepared to yield up the ghost at any moment;
and when i recount something of my experiences on the journey, instead
of giving me credit for pluck, like other people, he merely inquires if
i don't recognize the protecting hand of providence; native modesty
prevents me telling the doctor of my valuable missionary work at sivas.
after the doctor's departure i wander forth into the bazaar to see what
it looks like after dark; many of the stalls are closed for the day, the
principal places remaining open being kahvay-khans and armenian wine-shops,
and before these petroleum lamps are kept burning; the remainder of the
bazaar is in darkness.  i have not strolled about many minutes before i
am corralled as usual by armenians; they straightway send off for a
youthful compatriot of theirs who has been to the missionary's school
at kaizareah and can speak a smattering of english.  after the usual
programme of questions, they suggest: "being an englishman, you are of
course a christian," by which they mean that i am not a mussulman.
"certainly," i reply; whereupon they lug me into one of their wine-shops
and tender me a glass of raki (a corruption of "arrack" - raw, fiery
spirits of the kind known among the english soldiers in india by the
suggestive pseudonym of "fixed bayonets").  smelling the raki, i make a
wry face and shove it away; thev look surprised and order the waiter to
bring cognac; to save the waiter the trouble, i make another wry face,
indicative of disapproval, and suggest that he bring vishner-su.
"vishner-su" two or three of them sing out in a chorus of blank amazement;
"ingilis.  christian? vishner-su." they exclaim, as though such a
preposterous and unaccountable thing as a christian partaking of a non-
intoxicating beverage like vishner-su is altogether beyond their
comprehension.  the youth who has been to the kaizareah school then
explains to the others that the american missionaries never indulge in
intoxicating beverages; this seems to clear away the clouds of their
mystification to some extent, and they order vishner-su, eying me
critically, however, as i taste it, as though expecting to observe me
make yet another wry countenance and acknowledge that in refusing the
fiery, throat-blistering raki i had made a mistake.

nothing in the way of bedding or furniture is provided in the caravanserai
rooms, but the proprietor gets me plenty of quilts, and i pass a reasonably
comfortable night.  in the morning i obtain breakfast and manage to escape
from town without attracting a crowd of more than a couple of hundred
people; a remarkable occurrence in its way, since erzingan contains a
population of about twenty thousand.  the road eastward from erzingan is
level, but heavy with dust, leading through a low portion of the valley
that earlier in the season is swampy, and gives the city an unenviable
reputation for malarial fevers.  to prevent the travellers drinking the
unwholesome water in this part of the valley, some benevolent mussulman
or public-spirited pasha has erected at intervals, by the road side,
compact mud huts, and placed there in huge earthenware vessels, holding
perhaps fifty gallons each; these are kept supplied with pure spring-water
and provided with a wooden drinking-scoop.  fourteen miles from erzingan,
at the entrance to a ravine whence flows the boisterous stream that
supplies a goodly proportion of the irrigating water for the valley, is
situated a military outpost station.  my road runs within two hundred
yards of the building, and the officers, seeing me evidently intending
to pass without stopping, motion for me to halt.  i know well enough they
want to examine my passport, and also to satisfy their curiosity concerning
the bicycle, but determine upon spurting ahead and escaping their bother
altogether.  this movement at once arouses the official suspicion as to
my being in the country without proper authority, and causes them to
attach some mysterious significance to my strange vehicle, and several
soldiers forthwith receive racing orders to intercept me.  unfortunately,
my spurting receives a prompt check at the stream, which is not bridged,
and here the doughty warriors intercept my progress, taking me into
custody with broad grins of satisfaction, as though pretty certain of
having made an important capture.  since there is no escaping, i conclude
to have a little quiet amusement out of the affair, anyway, so i refuse
point-blank to accompany my captors to their officer, knowing full well
that any show of reluctance will have the very natural effect of arousing
their suspicions still further.  the bland and childlike soldiers of the
crescent receive this show of obstinacy quite complacently, their swarthy
countenances wreathed in knowing smiles; but they make no attempt at
compulsion, satisfying themselves with addressing me deferentially as
"effendi," and trying to coax me to accompany them.  seeing that there is
some difficulty about bringing me, the two officers come down, and i at
once affect righteous indignation of a mild order, and desire to know
what they mean by arresting my progress.  they demand my tesskeri in a
manner that plainly shows their doubts of my having one.  the teskeri is
produced.  one of the officers then whispers something to the other, and
they both glance knowingly mysterious at the bicycle, apologize for
having detained me, and want to shake hands.  having read the passport,
and satisfied themselves of my nationality, they attach some deep
mysterious significance to my journey in this incomprehensible manner
up in this particular quarter; but they no longer wish to offer any
impediment to my progress, but rather to render me assistance.  poor
fellows! how suspicious they are of their great overgrown neighbor to
the north.  what good-humored fellows these turkish soldiers are! what
simple-hearted, overgrown children.  what a pity that they are the victims
of a criminally incompetent government that neither pays, feeds, nor
clothes them a quarter as well as they deserve.  in the fearful winters
of erzeroum, they have been known to have no clothing to wear but the
linen suits provided for the hot weather.  their pay, insignificant though
it be, is as uncertain as gambling; but they never raise a murmur.  being
by nature and religion fatalists, they cheerfully accept these undeserved
hardships as the will of allah.  to-day is the hottest i have experienced
in asia minor, and soon after leaving the outpost i once more encounter
the everlasting mountains, following now the trebizond and erzingan
caravan trail.  once again i get benighted in the mountains, and push
ahead for some time after dark.  i am beginning to think of camping out
supperless again when i hear the creaking of a buffalo araba some distance
ahead.  soon i overtake it, and, following it for half a mile off the
trail, i find myself before an enclosure of several acres, surrounded
by a high stone wall with quite imposing gateways.  it is the walled
village of housseubegkhan, one of those places built especially for the
accommodation of the trebizond caravans in the winter.  i am conducted
into a large apartment, which appears to be set apart for the hospitable
accommodation of travellers.  the apartment is found already occupied by
three travellers, who, from their outward appearance, might well be taken
for cutthroats of the worst description; and the villagers swarming in,
i am soon surrounded by the usual ragged, flea-bitten congregation.  there
are various arms and warlike accoutrements hanging on the wall, enough
of one kind or other to arm a small company.  they all belong to the three
travellers, however; my modest little revolver seems really nothing
compared with the warlike display of swords, daggers, pistols and guns
hanging around; the place looks like a small armory.  the first question
is-as is usual of late - "russ or ingilis." some of the younger and less
experienced men essay to doubt my word, and, on their own supposition
that i am a russian, begin to take unwarrantable liberties with my person;
one of them steals up behind and commences playing a tattoo on my helmet
with two sticks of wood, by way of bravado, and showing his contempt for
a subject of the czar.  turning round, i take one of the sticks away and
chastise him with it until he howls for allah to protect him, and then,
without attempting any sort of explanation to the others, resume my seat;
one of the travellers then solemnly places his forefingers together and
announces himself as kardash (my brother), at the same time pointing
significantly to his choice assortment of ancient weapons.  i shake hands,
with him and remind him that i am somewhat hungry; whereupon he orders
a villager to forthwith contribute six eggs, another butter to fry them
in, and a third bread; a tezek fire is already burning, and with his own
hands he fries the eggs, and makes my ragged audience stand at a respectful
distance while i eat; if i were to ask him, he would probably clear the
room of them instanter.  about ten o'clock my impromptu friend and his
companion order their horses, and buckle their arms and accoutrements
about them to depart; my "brother" stands before me and loads up his
flintlock rifle; it is a fearful and wonderful process; it takes him at
least two minutes; he does not seem to know on which particular part of
his wonderful paraphernalia to find the slugs, the powder, or the patching,
and he finishes by tearing a piece of rag off a by-standing villager to
place over the powder in the pan.  while he is doing all this, and
especially when ramming home the bullet, he looks at me as though expecting
me to come and pat him approvingly on the shoulder.  when they are gone,
the third traveller, who is going to remain over night, edges up beside
me, and pointing to his own imposing armory, likewise announces himself
as my brother; thus do i unexpectedly acquire two brothers within the
brief space of an evening.  the villagers scatter to their respective
quarters; quilts are provided for me, and a ghostly light is maintained
by means of a cup of grease and a twisted rag.  in one corner of the room
is a paunchy youngster of ten or twelve summers, whom i noticed during
the evening as being without a single garment to cover his nakedness;
he has partly inserted himself into a largo, coarse, nose-bag, and lies
curled up in that ridiculous position, probably imagining himself in
quite comfortable quarters.  "oh, wretched youth." i mentally exclaim,
"what will you do when that nose-bag has petered out?" and soon afterward
i fall asleep, in happy consciousness of perfect security beneath the
protecting shadow of brother number two and his formidable armament of
ancient weapons.  ten miles of good ridable road from houssenbegkhan, and
i again descend into the valley of the west fork of the euphrates,
crossing the river on an ancient stone bridge; i left houssenbegkhan
without breakfasting, preferring to make my customary early start and
trust to luck.  i am beginning to doubt the propriety of having done so,
and find myself casting involuntary glances toward a koordish camp that
is visible some miles to the north of my route, when, upon rounding a
mountain-spur jutting out into the valley, i descry the minaret of
mamakhatoun in the distance ahead.  a minaret hereabout is a sure indication
of a town of sufficient importance to support a public eating-khan,
where, if not a very elegant, at least a substantial meal is to be
obtained.  i obtain an acceptable breakfast of kabobs and boiled sheeps'-
trotters; killing two birds with one stone by satisfying my own appetite
and at the same time giving a first-class entertainment to a khan-full
of wondering-eyed people, by eating with the khan-jee's carving-knife
and fork in preference to my fingers.  here, as at houssenbeg-khan, there
is a splendid, large caravanserai; here it is built chiefly of hewn
stone, and almost massive enough for a fortress; this is a mountainous,
elevated region, where the winters are stormy and severe, and these
commodious and substantial retreats are absolutely necessary for the
safety of erzingan and trebizond caravans during the winter.  the country
now continues hilly rather than mountainous the road is generally too
heavy with sand and dust, churned up by the erzingan mule-caravans, to
admit of riding wherever the grade is unfavorable; but much good wheeling
surface is encountered on long, gentle declivities and comparatively
level stretches.

during the forenoon i meet a company of three splendidly armed and mounted
circassians; they remain speechless with astonishment until i have passed
beyond their hearing; they then conclude among themselves that i am
something needing investigation; they come galloping after me, and having
caught up, their spokesman gravely delivers himself of the solitary
monosyllable, "russ?" "ingilis," i reply, and they resume the even tenor
of their way without questioning me further.  later in the day the hilly
country develops into a mountainous region, where the trail intersects
numerous deep ravines whose sides are all but perpendicular.  between
the ravines the riding is ofttimes quite excellent, the composition being
soft shale, that packs down hard and smooth beneath the animals' feet.
deliciously cool streams flow at the bottom of these ravines.  at one
crossing i find an old man washing his feet, and mournfully surveying
sundry holes in the bottom of his sandals; the day is hot, and i likewise
halt a few minutes to cool my pedal extremities in the crystal water.
with that childlike simplicity i have so often mentioned, and which is
nowhere encountered as in the asiatic turk, the old fellow blandly asks
me to exchange my comparatively sound moccasins for his worn-out sandals,
at the same time ruefully pointing out the dilapidated condition of the
latter, and looking as dejected as though it were the only pair of sandals
in the world.

this afternoon i am passing along the same road where mahmoud ali's gang
robbed a large party of armenian harvesters who had been south to help
harvest the wheat, and were returning home in a body with the wages
earned during the summer.  this happened but a few days before, and
notwithstanding the well-known saying that lightning never strikes twice
in the same place, one is scarcely so unimpressionable as not to find
himself involuntarily scanning his surroundings, half expecting to be
attacked.  nothing startling turns up, however, and at five o'clock i
come to a village which is enveloped in clouds of wheat chaff; being a
breezy evening, winnowing is going briskly forward on several threshing-floors.
after duly binning, i am taken under the protecting wing of a prominent
villager, who is walking about with his hand in a sling, the reason
whereof is a crushed finger; he is a sensible, intelligent fellow, and
accepts my reply that i am not a crushed-finger hakim with all reasonableness;
he provides a substantial supper of bread and yaort, and then installs
me in a small, windowless, unventilated apartment adjoining the buffalo-
stall, provides me with quilts, lights a primitive grease-lamp, and
retires.  during the evening the entire female population visit my dimly-
lighted quarters, to satisfy their feminine curiosity by taking a timid
peep at their neighbor's strange guest and his wonderful araba.  they
imagine i am asleep and come on tiptoe part way across the room, craning
their necks to obtain a view in the semi-darkness.

an hour's journey from this village brings me yet again into the west
euphrates valley.  just where i enter the valley the river spreads itself
over a wide stony bed, coursing along in the form of several comparatively
small streams.  there is, of course, no bridge here, and in the chilly,
almost frosty, morning i have to disrobe and carry clothes and bicycle
across the several channels.  once across, i find myself on the great
trebizond and persian caravan route, and in a few minutes am partaking
of breakfast at a village thirty-five miles from erzeroum, where i learn
with no little satisfaction that my course follows along the euphrates
valley, with an artificial wagon-road, the whole distance to the city.
not far from the village the euphrates is recrossed on a new stone bridge.
just beyond the bridge is the camp of a road-engineer's party, who are
putting the finishing touches to the bridge.  a person issues from one
of the tents as i approach and begins chattering away at me in french.
the face and voice indicates a female, but the costume consists of jack-
boots, tight-fitting broadcloth pantaloons, an ordinary pilot-jacket,
and a fez.  notwithstanding the masculine apparel, however, it turns out
not only to be a woman, but a parisienne, the better half of the erzeroum
road engineer, a frenchman, who now appears upon the scene.  they are
both astonished and delighted at seeing a "velocipede," a reminder of
their own far-off france, on the persian caravan trail, and they urge
me to remain and partake of coffee.

i now encounter the first really great camel caravans, en route to persia
with tea and sugar and general european merchandise; they are all camped
for the day alongside the road, and the camels scattered about the
neighboring hills in search of giant thistles and other outlandish
vegetation, for which the patient ship of the desert entertains a
partiality.  camel caravans travel entirely at night during the summer.
contrary to what, i think, is a common belief in the occident, they can
endure any amount of cold weather, but are comparatively distressed by
the heat; still, this may not characterize all breeds of camels any more
than the different breeds of other domesticated animals.  during the
summer, when the camels are required to find their own sustenance along
the road, a large caravan travels but a wretched eight miles a day, the
remainder of the time being occupied in filling his capacious thistle
and camel-thorn receptacle; this comes of the scarcity of good grazing
along the route, compared with the number of camels, and the consequent
necessity of wandering far and wide in search of pasturage, rather than
because of the camel's absorptive capacity, for he is a comparatively
abstemious animal.  in the winter they are fed on balls of barley flour,
called nawalla; on this they keep fat and strong, and travel three times
the distance.  the average load of a full-grown camel is about seven
hundred pounds.

before reaching erzeroum i have a narrow escape from what might have
proved a serious accident.  i meet a buffalo araba carrying a long
projecting stick of timber; the sleepy buffaloes pay no heed to the
bicycle until i arrive opposite their heads, when they - give a sudden
lurch side wise, swinging the stick of timber across my path; fortunately
the road happens to be of good-width, and by a very quick swerve i avoid
a collision, but the tail end of the timber just brushes the rear wheel
as i wheel past.  soon after noon i roll into erzeroum, or rather, up to
the trebizond gate, and dis-mount.  erzeroum is a fortified city of
considerable importance, both from a commercial and a military point of
view; it is surrounded by earthwork fortifications, from the parapets
of which large siege guns frown forth upon the surrounding country, and
forts are erected in several commanding positions round about, like
watch-dogs stationed outside to guard the city.  patches of snow linger
on the palantokan moiintains, a few miles to the south; the deve boyuu
hills, a spur of the greater palantokans, look down on the city from
the east; the broad valley of the west euphrates stretches away westward
and northward, terminating at the north in another mountain range.

repairing to the english consulate, i am gratified at finding several
letters awaiting me, and furthermore by the cordial hospitality extended
by yusuph effendi, an assyrian gentleman, the charg'e d'affaires of the
consulate for the time being, colonel e--, the consul, having left
recently for trebizond and england, in consequence of numerous sword-wounds
received at the hands of a desperado who invaded the consulate for plunder
at midnight.  the colonel was a general favorite in erzeroum, and is being
tenderly carried (thursday, september 3, 1885) to trebizond on a stretcher
by relays of willing natives, no less than forty accompanying him on the
road.  yusuph effendi tells me the story of the whole lamentable affair,
pausing at intervals to heap imprecations on the head of the malefactor,
and to bestow eulogies on the wounded consul's character.

it seems that the door-keeper of the consulate, a native of a neighboring
armenian village, was awakened at midnight by an acquaintance from the
same village, who begged to be allowed to share his quarters till morning.
no sooner had the servant admitted him to his room than he attacked him
with his sword, intending-as it afterward leaked out-to murder the whole
family, rob the house, and escape.  the servant's cries for assistance
awakened colonel e--, who came to his rescue without taking the trouble
to provide himself with a weapon.  the man, infuriated at the detection
and the prospect of being captured and brought to justice, turned savagely
on the consul, inflicting several severe wounds on the head, hands, and
face.  the consul closed with him and threw him down, and called for his
wife to bring his revolver.  the wretch now begged so piteously for his
life, and made such specious promises, that the consul magnanimously let
him up, neglecting-doubtless owing to his own dazed condition from the
scalp wounds-to disarm him.  immediately he found himself released he
commenced the attack again, cutting and slashing like a demon, knocking
the revolver from the consul's already badly wounded hand while he yet
hesitated to pull the trigger and take his treacherous assailant's life.
the revolver went off as it struck the floor and wounded the consul
himself in the leg-broke it.  the servant now rallied sufficiently to
come to his assistance, and together they succeeded in disarming the
robber, who, however, escaped and bolted up-stairs, followed by the
servant with the sword.  the consul's wife, with praiseworthy presence
of mind, now appeared with a second revolver, which her husband grasped
in his left hand, the right being almost hacked to pieces.  dazed and
faint with the loss of blood, and, moreover, blinded by the blood flowing
from the scalp-wounds, it was only by sheer strength of will that he
could keep from falling.  at this juncture the servant unfortunately
appeared on the stairs, returning from an unsuccessful pursuit of the
robber.  mistaking the servant with the sword in his hand for the desperado
returning to the attack, and realizing his own helpless condition, the
consul fired two shots at him, wounding him with both shots.  the would-be
murderer is now (september 3,1885), captured and in durance vile; the
servant lies here in a critical condition, and the consul and his sorrowing
family are en route to england.

having determined upon resting here until monday, i spend a good part
of friday looking about the city.  the population is a mixture of turks,
armenians, russians, persians, and jews.  here.  i first make the acquaintance
of a persian tchai-khan (tea-drinking shop).  with the exception of the
difference in the beverages, there is little difference between a tchai-
khan and a icahvay-lchan, although in the case of a swell establishment,
the tchai-khan blossoms forth quite gaudily with scores of colored lamps.
the tea is served scalding hot in tiny glasses, which are first half-filled
with loaf-sugar.  if the proprietor is desirous of honoring or pleasing
a new or distinguished customer, he drops in lumps of sugar until it
protrudes above the glass.  the tea is made in a samovar-a brass vessel,
holding perhaps a gallon of water, with a hollow receptacle in the centre
for a charcoal fire.  strong tea is made in an ordinary queen's-ware
teapot that fits into the hollow; a small portion of this is poured into
the glass, which is then filled up with hot water from a tap in the
samovar.

there is a regular persian quarter in erzeroum, and i am not suffered
to stroll through it without being initiated into the fundamental
difference between the character of the persians and the turks.  when an
osmanli is desirous of seeing me ride the bicycle, he goes honestly and
straightforwardly to work at coaxing and worrying; except in very rare
instances they have seemed incapable of resorting to deceit or sharp
practice to gain their object.  not so childlike and honest, however, are
our new acquaintances, the persians.  several merchants gather round me,
and pretty soon they cunningly begin asking me how much i will sell the
bicycle for.  " fifty liras," i reply, seeing the deep, deep scheme hidden
beneath the superficial fairness of their observations, and thinking
this will quash all further commercial negotiations.  but the wily persians
are not so easily disposed of as this.  "bring it round and let us see
how it is ridden," they say, " and if we like it we will purchase it for
fifty liras, and perhaps make you a present besides." a persian would
rather try to gain an end by deceit than by honest and above-board
methods, even if the former were more trouble.  lying, cheating, and
deception is the universal rule among them; honesty and straightforwardness
are unknown virtues.  anyone whom they detect telling the truth or acting
honestly they consider a simpleton unfit to transact business.  the
missionaries and their families are at present tenting out, five miles
south of the city, in a romantic little ravine called kirk-dagheman, or
the place of the forty mills; and on saturday morning i receive a pressing
invitation to become their guest during the remainder of my stay.  the
erzeroum mission is represented by mr. chambers, his brother-now absent
on a tour-their respective families, and miss powers.  yusuph effendi
accompanies us out to the camp on a spendid arab steed, that curvets
gracefully the whole way.  myself and the-other missionary people (bicycle
work at sivas, and again at erzeroum) ride more sober and deco-ous
animals.  kirkdagheman is found to be near the entrance to a pass over
the palantokan mountains.  half a dozen small tents are pitched beneath
the only grove of trees for many a mile around.  a dancing stream of
crystal water furnishes the camp with an abundance of that necessary,
as also a lavish supply of such music as babbling brooks coursing madly
over pebbly beds are wont to furnish.  to this particular section of the
little stream legendary lore has attached a story which gives the locality
its name, kirkdagheman.

" once upon a time, a worthy widow found herself the happy possessor of
no less than forty small grist-mills strung along this stream.  soon after
her husband's death, the lady's amiable qualities-and not unlikely her
forty mills into the bargain-attracted the admiration of a certain wealthy
owner of flocks in the neighborhood, and he sought her hand in marriage.
'no,' said the lady, who, being a widow, had perhaps acquired wisdom; '
no; i have forty sons, each one faithfully laboring and contributing
cheerfully toward my support; therefore, i have no use for a husband.'
' i will kill your forty sons, and compel you to become my wife,' replied
the suitor, in a huff at being rejected.  and he went and sheared all his
sheep, and, with the multitudinous fleeces, dammed up the stream, caused
the water to flow into other channels, and thereby rendered the widow's
forty mills useless and unproductive.  with nothing but ruination before
her, and seeing no alternative, the widow's heart finally softened, and
she suffered herself to be wooed and won.  the fleeces were removed, the
stream returned to its proper channel, and the merry whir of the forty
mills henceforth mingled harmoniously with tlie bleating of the sheep."
two days are spent at the quiet missionary camp, and thoroughly enjoyed.
it seems like an oasis of home life in the surrounding desert of uncongenial
social conditions.  i eagerly devour the contents of several american
newspapers, and embrace the opportunities of the occasion, even to the
extent of nursing the babies (missionaries seem rare folks for babies),
of which there are three in camp.  the altitude of erzeroum is between
six thousand and seven thousand feet; the september nights are delightfully
cool, and there are no blood-thirsty mosquitoes.  i am assigned a sleeping-
tent close alongside a small waterfall, whose splashing music is a
soporific that holds me in the bondage of beneficial repose until breakfast
is announced both mornings; and on monday morning i feel as though the
hunger, the irregular sleep, and the rough-and-tumble dues generally of
the past four weeks were but a troubled dream.  again the bicycle contributes
its curiosity-quickening and question-exciting powers for the benefit
of the sluggish-minded pupils of the mission school.  the persian consul
and his sons come to see me ride ; he is highly interested upon learning
that i am travelling on the wheel to the persian capital, and he vises
my passport and gives me a letter of introduction to the pasha khan of
ovahjik, the first village i shall come to beyond the frontier.

it is nearly 3 p.m., september 7th, when i bid farewell to everybody,
and wheel out through the persian gate, accompanied by mr. chambers on
horseback, who rides part way to the deve boyun (camel's neck) pass.  on
the way out he tells me that he has been intending taking a journey
through the caucasus this autumn, but the difficulties of obtaining
permission, on account of his being a clergyman, are so great-a special
permission having to be obtained from st.  petersburg-that he has about
relinquished the idea for the present season.  deve boyun pass leads over
a comparatively low range of hills.  it was here where the turkish army,
in november, 1877, made their last gallant attempt to stem the tide of
disaster that had, by the fortunes of war and the incompeteucy of their
commanders, set in irresistibly against them, before taking refuge inside
the walls of the city.  an hour after parting from mr. chambers i am
wheeling briskly down the same road on the eastern slope of the pass
where mukhtar pasha's ill-fated column was drawn into the fatal ambuscade
that suddenly turned the fortunes of the day against them.  while rapidly
gliding down the gentle gradient, i fancy i can see the cossack regiments,
advancing toward the turkish position, the unwary and over-confident
osmanlis leaping from their intrenchments to advance along the road and
drive them back; now i come to the nabi tchai ravines, where the concealed
masses of eussian infantry suddenly sprang up and cut off their retreat;
i fancy i can see- chug! wh-u-u-p! thud!-stars, and see them pretty
distinctly, too, for while gazing curiously about, locating the russian
ambushment, the bicycle strikes a sand-hole, and i am favored with the
worst header i have experienced for many a day.  i am-or rather was, a
minute ago-bowling along quite briskly; the header treats me to a fearful
shaking up; i arn sore all over the next morning, and present a sort of
a stiff-necked, woe-begone appearance for the next four days.  a bent
handle-bar and a slightly twisted rear wheel fork likewise forcibly
remind me that, while i am beyond the reach of repair shops, it will be
solomon-like wisdom on my part to henceforth survey battle-fields with
a larger margin of regard for things more immediately interesting.  from
the pass, my road descends into the broad and cultivated valley of the
passin su; the road is mostly ridable, though heavy with dust.  part way
to hassen kaleh i am compelled to use considerable tact to avoid trouble
with a gang of riotous kalir-jees whom i overtake; as i attempt to wheel
past, one of them wantonly essays to thrust his stick into the wheel;
as i spring from the saddle for sheer self-protection, they think i have
dismounted to attack him, and his comrades rush forward to his protection,
brandishing their sticks and swords in a menacing manner.  seeing himself
reinforced, as it were, the bold aggressor raises his stick as though
to strike me, and peremptorily orders me to bin and haidi.  very naturally
i refuse to remount the bicycle while surrounded by this evidently
mischievous crew; there are about twenty of them, and it requires much
self-control to prevent a conflict, in which, i am persuaded, somebody
would have been hurt; however, i finally manage to escape their undesirable
company and ride off amid a fusillade of stones.  this incident reminds
me of yusuph effendi's warning, that even though i had come thus far
without a zaptieh escort, i should require one now, owing to the more
lawless disposition of the people near the frontier.  near dark i reach
hassan kaleh, a large village nestling under the shadow of its former
importance as a fortified town, and seek the accommodation of a persian
tchai-khan; it is not very elaborate or luxurious accommodation, consisting
solely of tiny glasses of sweetened tea in the public room and a shake-down
in a rough, unfurnished apartment over the stable; eatables have to be
obtained elsewhere, but it matters little so long as they are obtainable
somewhere.  during the evening a persian troubadour and story-teller
entertains the patrons of the tchai-khan by singing ribaldish songs,
twanging a tambourine-like instrument, and telling stories in a sing-song
tone of voice.  in deference to the mixed nationality of his audience,
the sagacious troubadour wears a turkish fez, a persian coat, and a
eussian metallic-faced belt; the burden of his songs are of erzeroum,
erzingan, and ispahan; the russians, it would appear, are too few and
unpopular to justify risking the displeasure of the turks by singing any
eussian songs.  so far as my comprehension goes, the stories are chiefly
of intrigue and love affairs among pashas, and would quickly bring the
righteous retribution of the lord chamberlain down about his ears, were
he telling them to an english audience.  i have no small difficulty in
getting the bicycle up the narrow and crooked stairway into my sleeping
apartment; there is no fastening of any kind on the door, and the
proprietor seems determined upon treating every subject of the shah in
hassan kaleh to a private confidential exhibition of myself and bicycle,
after i have retired to bed.  it must be near midnight, i think, when i
am again awakened from my uneasy, oft-disturbed slumbers by murmuring
voices and the shuffling of feet; examining the bicycle by the feeble
glimmer of a classic lamp are a dozen meddlesome persians.  annoyed at
their unseemly midnight intrusion, and at being repeatedly awakened, i
rise up and sing out at them rather authoratively; i have exhibited the
marifet of my smith & wesson during the evening, and these intruders
seem really afraid i might be going to practise on them with it.  the
persians are apparently timid mortals; they evidently regard me as a
strange being of unknown temperament, who might possibly break loose and
encompass their destruction on the slightest provocation, and the
proprietor and another equally intrepid individual hurriedly come to my
couch, and pat me soothingly on the shoulders, after which they all
retire, and i am disturbed no more till morning.  the " rocky road to
dublin " is nothing compared to the road leading eastward from hassan
kaleh for the first few miles, but afterward it improves into very fair
wheeling.  eleven miles down the passiu su valley brings me to the armenian
village of kuipri kui.  having breakfasted before starting i wheel on
without halting, crossing the araxes eiver at the junction of the passin
su, on a very ancient stone bridge known as the tchebankerpi, or the
bridge of pastures, said to be over a thousand years old.  nearing dele
baba pass, a notorious place for robbers, i pass through a village of
sedentary koords.  soon after leaving the village a wild-looking koord,
mounted on an angular sorrel, overtakes me and wants me to employ him
as a guard while going through the pass, backing up the offer of his
presumably valuable services by unsheathing a semi-rusty sword and waving
it valiantly aloft.  he intimates, by tragically graphic pantomime, that
unless i traverse the pass under the protecting shadow of his ancient
and rusty blade, i will be likely to pay the penalty of my rashness by
having my throat cut.  yusuph effendi and the erzeroum missionaries have
thoughtfully warned me against venturing through the dele baba pass
alone, advising me to wait and go through with a persian caravan; but
this koord looks like anything but a protector; on the contrary, i am
inclined to regard him as a suspicious character himself, interviewing
me, perhaps, with ulterior ideas of a more objectionable character than
that of faithfully guarding me through the dele baba pass.  showing him
the shell-extracting mechanism of my revolver, and explaining the rapidity
with which it can be fired, i give him to understand that i feel quite
capable of guarding myself, consequently have no earthly use for his
services.  a tea caravan of some two hundred camels are resting near the
approach to the pass, affording me an excellent opportunity of having
company through by waiting and journeying with them in the night; but
warnings of danger have been repeated so often of late, and they have
proved themselves groundless so invariably that i should feel the taunts
of self-reproach were i to find myself hesitating to proceed on their
account.  passing over a mountain spur, i descend into a rocky canon,
with perpendicular walls of rock towering skyward like giant battlements,
inclosing a space not over fifty yards wide; through this runs my road,
and alongside it babbles the dele baba su.  the canon is a wild, lonely-
looking spot, and looks quite appropriate to the reputation it bears.
professor vambery, a recognized authority on asiatic matters, and whose
party encountered a gang of marauders here, says the dele baba pass bore
the same unsavory reputation that it bears to-day as far back as the
time of herodotus.  however, suffice it to say, that i get through without
molestation; mounted men, armed to the teeth, like almost everybody else
hereabouts, are encountered in the pass; they invariably halt and look
back after me as though endeavoring to comprehend who and what i am, but
that is all.  emerging from the canon, i follow in a general course the
tortuous windings of the dele baba su through another ravine- riven
battle-field of the late war, and up toward its source in a still more
mountainous and elevated region beyond.






chapter xviii.




mount ararat and koordistan.

the shades of evening are beginning to settle down over the wild mountainous
country round about.  it is growing uncomfortably chilly for this early
in the evening, and the prospects look favorable for a supperless and
most disagreeable night, when i descry a village perched in an opening
among the mountains a mile or thereabouts off to the right.  repairing
thither, i find it to be a koordish village, where the hovels are more
excavations than buildings; buffaloes, horses, goats, chickens, and human
beings all find shelter under the same roof; their respective quarters
are nothing but a mere railing of rough poles, and as the question of
ventilation is never even thought of, the effect upon one's olfactory
nerves upon entering is anything but reassuring.  the filth and rags of
these people is something abominable; on account of the chilliness of
the evening they have donned their heavier raiment; these have evidently
had rags patched on. top of other rags for years past until they have
gradually developed into thick-quilted garments, in the innumerable
seams of which the most disgusting entomological specimens, bred and
engendered by their wretched mode of existence, live and perpetuate their
kind.  however, repulsive as the outlook most assuredly is, i have no
alternative but to cast my lot among them till morning.  i am conducted
into the sheikh's apartment, a small room partitioned off with a pole
from a stable-full of horses and buffaloes, and where darkness is made
visible by the sickly glimmer of a grease lamp.  the sheikh, a thin,
sallow-faced man of about forty years, is reclining on a mattress in one
corner smoking cigarettes; a dozen ill-conditioned ragamuffins are
squatting about in various attitudes, while the rag, tag, and bobtail
of the population crowd into the buffalo-stable and survey me and the
bicycle from outside the partition-pole.

a circular wooden tray containing an abundance of bread, a bowl of yaort,
and a small quantity of peculiar stringy cheese that resembles chunks
of dried codfish, warped and twisted in the drying, is brought in and
placed in the middle of the floor.  everybody in the room at once gather
round it and begin eating with as little formality as so many wild
animals; the sheikh silently motions for me to do the same.  the yaort
bowl contains one solitary wooden spoon, with which they take turns at
eating mouthfuls.  one is compelled to draw the line somewhere, even under
the most uncompromising circumstances, and i naturally draw it against
eating yaort with this same wooden spoon; making small scoops with pieces
of bread, i dip up yaort and eat scoop and all together.  these particular
koords seem absolutely ignorant of anything in the shape of mannerliness,
or of consideration for each other at the table.  when the yaort has been
dipped into twice or thrice all round, the sheikh coolly confiscates the
bowl, eats part of what is left, pours water into the remainder, stirs
it up with his hand, and deliberately drinks it all up; one or two others
seize all the cheese, utterly regardless of the fact that nothing remains
for myself and their companions, who, by the by, seem to regard it as a
perfectly natural proceeding.

after supper they return to their squatting attitudes around the room,
and to a resumption of their never-ceasing occupation of scratching
themselves.  the eminent economist who lamented the wasted energy represented
in the wagging of all the dogs' tails in the world, ought to have travelled
through asia on a bicycle and have been compelled to hob-nob with the
villagers; he would undoubtedly have wept with sorrow at beholding the
amount of this same wasted energy, represented by the above-mentioned
occupation of the people.  the most loathsome member of this interesting
company is a wretched old hypocrite who rolls his eyes about and heaves
a deep-drawn sigh of allah! every few minutes, and then looks furtively
at myself and the sheikh to observe its effects; his sole garment is a
round-about mantle that reaches to his knees, and which seems to have
been manufactured out of the tattered remnants of other tattered remnants
tacked carelessly together without regard to shape, size, color, or
previous condition of cleanliness; his thin, scrawny legs are bare, his
long black hair is matted and unkempt, his beard is stubby and unlovely
to look upon, his small black eyes twinkle in the semi-darkness like
ferret's eyes, while soap and water have to all appearances been altogether
stricken from the category of his personal requirements.  probably it is
nothing but the lively workings of my own imagination, but this wretch
appears to me to entertain a decided preference for my society, constantly
insinuating himself as near me as possible, necessitating constant
watchfulness on my part to avoid actual contact with him; eternal
vigilance is in this case the price of what it is unnecessary to expatiate
upon, further than to say that self-preservation becomes, under such
conditions, preeminently the first law of occidental nature.  soon the
sallow-faced sheikh suddenly bethinks himself that he is in the august
presence of a hakim, and beckoning me to his side, displays an ugly wound
on his knee which has degenerated into a running sore, and which he says
was done with a sword; of course he wants me to perform a cure.  while
examining the sheikh's knee, another old party comes forward and unbares
his arm, also wounded with a sword.  this not unnaturally sets me to
wondering what sort of company i have gotten into, and how they came by
sword wounds in these peaceful times; but my inquisitivencss is compelled
to remain in abeyance to my limited linguistic powers.  having nothing
to give them for the wounds, i recommend an application of warm salt
water twice a day; feeling pretty certain, however, that they will be
too lazy and trifling to follow the advice.  before dispersing to their
respective quarters, the occupants of the room range themselves in a row
and go through a religious performance lasting fully half an hour; they
make almost as much noise as howling dervishes, meanwhile exercising
themselves quite violently.  having made themselves holier than ever by
these exercises, some take their departure, others make up couches on
the floor with sheepskins and quilts.  thin ice covers the still pools
of water when i resume my toilsome route over the mountains at daybreak,
a raw wind coines whistling from the east, and until the sun begins to
warm things up a little, it is necessary to stop and buffet occasionally
to prevent benumbed hands.  obtaining some small lumps of wheaten dough
cooked crisp in hot grease, like unsweetened doughnuts, from a horseman
on the road, i push ahead toward the summit and then down the eastern
slope of the mountains; rounding an abutting hill about 9.30, the glorious
snow-crowned peak of ararat suddenly bursts upon my vision; it is a good
forty leagues away, but even at this distance it dwarfs everything else
in sight.  although surrounded by giant mountain chains that traverse the
country at every conceivable angle, ararat stands alone in its solitary
grandeur, a glistening white cone rearing its giant height proudly and
conspicuously above surrounding eminences; about mountains that are
insignificant only in comparison with the white-robed monarch that has
been a beacon-light of sacred history since sacred history has been in
existence.

descending now toward the alashgird plain, a prominent theatre of action
during the war, i encounter splendid wheeling for some miles; but once
fairly down on the level, cultivated plain, the road becomes heavy with
dust.  villages dot the broad, expansive plain in every direction; conical
stacks of tezek are observable among the houses, piled high up above the
roofs, speaking of commendable forethought for the approaching cold
weather.  in one of the armenian villages i am not a little surprised at
finding a lone german; he says he prefers an agricultural life in this
country with all its disadvantages, to the hard, grinding struggle for
existence, and the compulsory military service of the fatherland.  "here,"
he goes on to explain, "there is no foamy lager, no money, no comfort,
no amusement of any kind, but there is individual liberty, and it is
very easy making a living; therefore it is for me a better country than
deutschland." " everybody to their liking," i think, as i continue on
across the plain; but for a european to be living in one of these little
agricultural villages comes the nearest to being buried alive of anything
i know of.  the road improves in hardness as i proceed eastward, but the
peculiar disadvantages of being a conspicuous and incomprehensible object
on a populous level plain soon becomes manifest.  seeing the bicycle
glistening in the sunlight as i ride along, horsemen come wildly galloping
from villages miles away.  some of these wonderstricken people endeavor
to pilot me along branch trails leading to their villages, but the main
caravan trail is now too easily distinguishable for any little deceptiona
of this kind to succeed.  here, on the alashgird plain, i first hear
myself addressed as "hamsherri," a term which now takes the place of
effendi for the next five hundred miles.  owing to the disgust engendered
by my unsavory quarters in the wretched dele baba village last night, i
have determined upon seeking the friendly shelter of a wheat-shock again
to-night, preferring the chances of being frozen out at midnight to the
entomological possibilities of village hovels.  accordingly, near sunset,
i repair to a village not far from the road, for the purpose of obtaining
something to eat before seeking out a rendezvous for the night.  it turns
out to be the koordish village of malosman, and the people are found to
be so immeasurably superior in every particular to their kinsfolk of
dele baba that i forthwith cancel my determination and accept their
proffered hospitality.  the malosmanlis are comparatively clean and
comfortable; are reasonably well-dressed, seem well-to-do, and both men
and women are, on the average, handsomer than the people of any village
i have seen for days past.  almost all possess a conspicuously beautiful
set of teeth, pleasant, smiling countenances and good physique; they
also seem to have, somehow, acquired easy, agreeable manners.  the secret
of the whole difference, i opine, is that, instead of being located among
the inhospitable soil of barren hills they are cultivating the productive
soil of the alashgird plain, and, being situated on the great persian
caravan trail, they find a ready market for their grain in supplying the
caravans in winter.  their sheikh is a handsome and good-natured young
fellow, sporting white clothes trimmed profusely with red braid; he
spends the evening in my company, examining the bicycle, revolver,
telescopic pencil-case, l.a.w. badge, etc., and hands me his carved
ivory case to select cigarettes from.  it would have required considerable
inducements to have trusted either my l.a.w. badge or the smith &
wesson in the custody of any of our unsavory acquaintances of last night,
notwithstanding their great outward show of piety.  there are no deep-drawn
sighs of allah, nor ostentatious praying among the malosmanlis, but they
bear the stamp of superior trustworthiness plainly on their faces and
their bearing.  there appears to be far more jocularity than religion
among these prosperous villagers, a trait that probably owes its development
to their apparent security from want; it is no newly discovered trait
of human character to cease all prayers and supplications whenever the
granary is overflowing with plenty, and to commence devotional exercises
again whenever the supply runs short.  this rule would hold good among
the childlike natives here, even more so than it does among our more
enlightened selves.  i sally forth into the chilly atmosphere of early
morning from maloaman, and wheel eastward over an excellent road for
some miles; an obliging native, en route to the harvest field, turns his
buffalo araba around and carts me over a bridgeless stream, but several
others have to be forded ere reaching kirakhan, where i obtain breakfast.
here i am required to show my teskeri to the mudir, and the zaptieh
escorting me thither becomes greatly mystified over the circumstance
that i am a frank and yet am wearing a mussulman head-band around my
helmet (a new one i picked up on the road); this little fact appeals to
him as something savoring of an attempt to disguise myself, and he grows
amusingly mysterious while whisperingly bringing it to the mudir's
notice.  the habitual serenity and complacency of the corpulent mudir's
mind, however, is not to be unduly disturbed by trifles, and the untutored
zaptieh's disposition to attach some significant meaning to it, meets
with nothing from his more enlightened superior but the silence of
unconcern.  more streams have to be forded ere i finally emerge on to
higher ground; all along the alashgird plain, ararat's glistening peak
has been peeping over the mountain framework of the plain like a white
beacon-light showing above a dark rocky shore; but approaching toward
the eastern extremity of the plain, my road hugs the base of the intervening
hills and it temporarily disappears from view.  in this portion of the
country, camels are frequently employed in bringing the harvest from
field to village threshing-floor; it is a curious sight to see these
awkwardly moving animals walking along beneath tremendous loads of straw,
nothing visible but their heads and legs.  sometimes the meandering course
of the euphrates - now the eastern fork, and called the moorad-chai - brings
it near the mountains, and my road leads over bluffs immediately above
it; the historic river seems well supplied with trout hereabouts, i can
look down from the bluffs and observe speckled beauties sporting about
in its pellucid waters by the score.  toward noon i fool away fifteen
minutes trying to beguile one of them into swallowing a grasshopper and
a bent pin, but they are not the guileless creatures they seem to be
when surveyed from an elevated bluff, so they steadily refuse whatever
blandishments i offer.  an hour later i reach the village of daslische,
inhabited by a mixed population of turks and persians.  at a shop kept
by one of the latter i obtain some bread and ghee (clarified butter),
some tea, and a handful of wormy raisins for dessert; for these articles,
besides building a fire especially to prepare the tea, the unconscionable
persian charges the awful sum of two piastres (ten cents); whereupon the
turks, who have been interested spectators of the whole nefarious
proceeding, commence to abuse him roundly for overcharging a stranger
unacquainted with the prices of the locality calling him the son of a
burnt father, and other names that tino-je unpleasantly in the persian
ear, as though it was a matter of pounds sterling.  beyond daslische,
ararat again becomes visible; the country immediately around is a ravine-
riven plateau, covered with bowlders.  an hour after leaving daslische,
while climbing the eastern slope of a ravine, four rough-looking footmen
appear on the opposite side of the slope; they are following after me,
and shouting "kardash!" these people with their old swords and pistols
conspicuously about them, always raise suspicions of brigands and evil
characters under such circumstances as these, so i continue on up the
slope without heeding their shouting until i observe two of them turn
back; i then wait, out of curiosity, to see what they really want.  they
approach with broad grins of satisfaction at having overtaken me: they
have run all the way from daslische in order to overtake me and see the
bicycle, having heard of it after i had left.  i am now but a short
distance from the russian frontier on the north, and the first turkish
patrol is this afternoon patrolling the road; he takes a wondering
interest in my wheel, but doesn't ask the oft-repeated question, "russ
or ingiliz?" it is presumed that he is too familiar with the muscovite
"phiz" to make any such question necessary.

about four o'clock i overtake a jack-booted horseman, who straightway
proceeds to try and make himself agreeable; as his flowing remarks are
mostly unintelligible, to spare him from wasting the sweetness of his
eloquence on the desert air around me, i reply, "turkchi binmus." instead
of checking the impetuous torrent of his remarks at hearing this, he
canters companionably alongside, and chatters more persistently than
ever.  "t-u-r-k-chi b-i-n-m-u-s!" i repeat, becoming rather annoyed at
his persistent garrulousness and his refusal to understand.  this has
the desired effect of reducing him to silence; but he canters doggedly
behind, and, after a space creeps up alongside again, and, pointing to
a large stone building which has now become visible at the base of a
mountain on the other side of the euphrates, timidly ventures upon the
explanation that it is the armenian gregorian monastery of sup ogwanis
(st. john).  finding me more favorably disposed to listen than before,
he explains that he himself is an armenian, is acquainted with the priests
of the monastery, and is going to remain there over night; he then
proposes that i accompany him thither, and do likewise.  i am, of course,
only too pleased at the prospect of experiencing something out of the
common, and gladly avail myself of the opportunity; moreover, monasteries
and religious institutions in general, have somehow always been pleasantly
associated in my thoughts as inseparable accompaniments of orderliness
and cleanliness, and i smile serenely to myself at the happy prospect
of snowy sheets, and scrupulously clean cooking.

crossing the euphrates on a once substantial stone bridge, now in a sadly
dilapidated condition, that was doubtless built when armenian monasteries
enjoyed palmier days than the present, we skirt the base of a compact
mountain and in a few minutes alight at the monastery village.  exit
immediately all visions of cleanliness; the village is in no wise different
from any other cluster of mud hovels round about, and the rag-bedecked,
flea-bitten objects that come outside to gaze at us, if such a thing
were possible, compare unfavorably even with the dele baba koords.  there
is apparent at once, however, a difference between the respective
dispositions of the two peoples: the koords are inclined to be pig-headed
and obtrusive, as though possessed of their full share of the spirit of
self-assertion; the sup ogwanis people, on the contrary, act like beings
utterly destitute of anything of the kind, cowering beneath one's look
and shunning immediate contact as though habitually overcome with a sense
of their own inferiority.  the two priests come out to see the bicycle
ridden; they are stout, bushy-whiskered, greasy-looking old jokers, with
small twinkling black eyes, whose expression would seem to betoken
anything rather than saintliness, and, although the euphrates flows hard
by, they are evidently united in their enmity against soap and water,
if in nothing else; in fact, judging from outward appearances, water is
about the only thing concerning which they practise abstemiousness.  the
monastery itself is a massive structure of hewn stone, surrounded by a
high wall loop-holed for defence; attached to the wall inside is a long
row of small rooms or cells, the habitations of the monks in more
prosperous days; a few of them are occupied at present by the older men.;
at 5.30 p.m., the bell tolls for evening service, and i accompany my
guide into the monastery; it is a large, empty-looking edifice of simple,
massive architecture, and appears to have been built with a secondary
purpose of withstanding a siege or an assault, and as a place of refuge
for the people in troublous times; containing among other secular
appliances a large brick oven for baking bread.  during the last war, the
place was actually bombarded by the russiaus in an effort to dislodge a
body of koords who had taken possession of the monastery, and from behind
its solid walls, harassed the russian troops advancing toward erzeroum.
the patched up holes made by the russians' shots are pointed out, as
also some light earthworks thrown up on the russian position across the
river.  in these degenerate days one portion of the building is utilized
as a storehouse for grain; hundreds of pigeons are cooing and roosting
on the crossbeams, making the place their permanent abode, passing in
and out of narrow openings near the roof; and the whole interior is in
a disgustingly filthy condition.  rude fresco representations of the
different saints in the gregorian calendar formerly adorned the walls,
and bright colored tiles embellished the approach to the altar.  nothing
is distinguishable these days but the crumbling and half-obliterated
evidences of past glories; both priests and people seem hopelessly sunk
in the quagmire of avariciousness and low cunning on the one hand, and
of blind ignorance and superstition on the other.  clad in greasy and
seedy-looking cowls, the priests go through a few nonsensical manosuvres,
consisting chiefly of an ostentatious affectation of reverence toward
an altar covered with tattered drapery, by never turning their backs
toward it while they walk about, bible in hand, mumbling and sighing.
my self-constituted guide and myself comprise the whole congregation
during the "services." whenever the priests heave a particularly deep-
fetched sigh or fall to mumbling their prayers on the double quick, they
invariably cast a furtive glance toward me, to ascertain whether i am
noticing the impenetrable depth of their holiness.  they needn't be uneasy
on that score, however; the most casual observer cannot fail to perceive
that it is really and truly impenetrable - so impenetrable, in fact, that
it will never be unearthed, not even at the day of judgment.  in about
ten minutes the priests quit mumbling, bestow a pharisaical kiss on the
tattered coverlet of their bibles, graciously suffer my jack-booted
companion to do likewise, as also two or three ragamuffins who have come
sneaking in seemingly for that special purpose, and then retreat hastily
behind a patch-work curtain; the next minute they reappear in a cowlless
condition, their countenances wearing an expression of intense relief,
as though happy at having gotten through with a disagreeable task that
had been weighing heavily on their minds all day.

we are invited to take supper with their reverences in their cell beneath
the walls, which they occupy in common.  the repast consists of yaort and
pillau, to which is added, by way of compliment to visitors, five salt
fishes about the size of sardines.  the most greasy-looking of the divines
thoughtfully helps himself to a couple of the fishes as though they were
a delicacy quite irresistible, leaving one apiece for us others.  having
created a thirst with the salty fish, he then seizes what remains of the
yaort, pours water into it, mixes it thoroughly together with his unwashed
hand, and gulps down a full quart of the swill with far greater gusto
than mannerliness.  soon the priests commence eructating aloud, which
appears to be a well-understood signal that the limit of their respective
absorptive capacities are reached, for three hungry-eyed laymen, who
have been watching our repast with seemingly begrudging countenances,
now carry the wooden tray bodily off into a corner and ravenously devour
the remnants.  everything about the cell is abnormally filthy, and i am
glad when the inevitable cigarettes are ended and we retire to the
quarters assigned us in the village.  here my companion produces from
some mysterious corner of his clothing a pinch of tea and a few lumps
of sugar.  a villager quickly kindles a fire and cooks the tea, performing
the services eagerly, in anticipation of coming in for a modest share
of what to him is an unwonted luxury.  being rewarded with a tiny glassful
of tea and a lump of sugar, he places the sweet morsel in his mouth and
sucks the tea through it with noisy satisfaction, prolonging the presumably
delightful sensation thereby produced to fully a couple of minutes.
during this brief indulgence of his palate, a score of his ragged co-
religionists stand around and regard him with mingled envy and covetousness;
but for two whole minutes he occupies his proud eminence in the lap of
comparative luxury, and between slow, lingering sucks at the tea, regards
their envious attention with studied indifference.  one can scarcely
conceive of a more utterly wretched people than the monastic community
of sup ogwanis; one would not be surprised to find them envying even the
pariah curs of the country.  the wind blows raw and chilly from off the
snowy slopes of ararat next morning, and the shivering, half-clad-wretches
shuffle off toward the fields and pastures, - with blue noses and unwilling
faces, humping their backs and shrinking within themselves and wearing
most lugubrious countenances; one naturally falls to wondering what they
do in the winter.  the independent villagers of the surrounding country
have a tough enough time of it, worrying through the cheerless winters
of a treeless and mountainous country; but they at least have no domestic
authority to obey but their own personal and family necessities, and
they consume the days huddled together in their unventilated hovels over
a smouldering tezek fire; but these people seem but helpless dolts under
the vassalage of a couple of crafty-looking, coarse-grained priests, who
regard them with less consideration than they do the monastery buffaloes.
eleven miles over a mostly ridable trail brings me to the large village
of dyadin.  dyadin is marked on my map as quite an important place,
consequently i approach it with every assurance of obtaining a good
breakfast.  my inquiries for refreshments are met with importunities of
bin bacalem, from five hundred of the rag-tag and bobtail of the frontier,
the rowdiest and most inconsiderate mob imaginable.  in their eagerness
and impatience to see me ride, and their exasperating indifference to
my own pressing wants, some of them tell me bluntly there is no bread;
others, more considerate, hurry away and bring enough bread to feed a
dozen people, and one fellow contributes a couple of onions.  pocketing
the onions and some of the bread, i mount and ride away from the madding
crowd with whatever despatch is possible, and retire into a secluded
dell near the road, a mile from town, to eat my frugal breakfast in peace
and quietness.  while thus engaged, it is with veritable savage delight
that i hear a company of horsemen go furiously galloping past; they are
dyadin people endeavoring to overtake me for the kindly purpose of
worrying me out of my senses, and to prevent me even eating a bite of
bread unseasoned with their everlasting gabble.  although the road from
dyadin eastward leads steadily upward, they fancy that nothing less than
a wild, sweeping gallop will enable them to accomplish their fell purpose;
i listen to their clattering hoof-beats dying away in the dreamy distance,
with a grin of positively malicious satisfaction, hoping sincerely that
they will keep galloping onward for the next twenty miles.  no such happy
consummation of my wishes occurs, however; a couple of miles up the
ascent i find them hobnobbing with some persian caravan men and patiently
awaiting my appearance, having learned from the persians that i had not
yet gone past.  mingled with the keen disappointment of overtaking them
so quickly, is the pleasure of witnessing the persians' camels regaling
themselves on a patch of juicy thistles of most luxuriant growth; the
avidity with which they attack the great prickly vegetation, and the
expression of satisfaction, utter and peculiar, that characterizes a
camel while munching a giant thistle stalk that protrudes two feet out
of his mouth, is simply indescribable.

>from this pass i descend into the aras plain, and, behold the gigantic
form of ararat rises up before me, seemingly but a few miles away; as a
matter of fact it is about twenty miles distant, but with nothing
intervening between myself and its tremendous proportions but the level
plain, the distance is deceptive.  no human habitations are visible save
the now familiar black tents of koordish tribesmen away off to the north,
and as i ride along i am overtaken by a sensation of being all alone in
the company of an overshadowing and awe-inspiring presence.  one's attention
seems irresistibly attracted toward the mighty snow-crowrned monarch,
as though,the immutable law of attraction were sensibly exerting itself
to draw lesser bodies to it, and all other objects around seemed dwarfed
into insignificant proportions.  one obtains a most comprehensive idea
of ararat's 17,325 feet when viewing it from the aras plain, as it rises
sheer from the plain, and not from the shoulders of a range that constitutes
of itself the greater part of the height, as do many mountain peaks.  a
few miles to the eastward is little ararat, an independent conical peak
of 12,800 feet, without snow, but conspicuous and distinct from surrounding
mountains; its proportions are completely dwarfed and overshadowed by
the nearness and bulkiness of its big brother.  the aras plain is lava-strewn
and uncultivated for a number of miles; the spongy, spreading feet of
innumerable camels have worn paths in the hard lava deposit that makes
the wheeling equal to english roads, except for occasional stationary
blocks of lava that the animals have systematically stepped over for
centuries, and which not infrequently block the narrow trail and compel
a dismount.  evidently ararat was once a volcano; the lofty peak which
now presents a wintry appearance even in the hottest summer weather,
formerly belched forth lurid flames that lit up the surrounding country,
and poured out fiery torrents of molten lava that stratified the abutting
hills, and spread like an overwhelming flood over the aras plain.  abutting
ararat on the west are stratiform hills, the strata of which are plainly
distinguishable from the persian trail and which, were their inclination
continued, would strike ararat at or near the summit.  this would seem
to indicate the layers to be representations of the mountain's former
volcanic overflowings.  i am sitting on a block of lava making an outline
sketch of ararat, when a peasant happens along with a bullock-load of
cucumbers which he is taking to the koordish camps; he is pretty badly
scared at finding himself all alone on the aras plain with such a
nondescript and dangerous-looking object as a helmeted wheelman, and
when i halt him with inquiries concerning the nature of his wares he
turns pale and becomes almost speechless with fright.  he would empty his
sacks as a peace-offering at my feet without venturing upon a remonstrance,
were he ordered to do so; and when i relieve him of but one solitary
cucumber, and pay him more than he would obtain for it among the koords,
he becomes stupefied with astonishment; when he continues on his way he
hardly knows whether he is on his head or his feet.  an hour later i
arrive at kizil dizah, the last village in turkish territory, and an
official station of considerable importance, where passports, caravan
permits, etc., of everybody passing to or from persia have to be examined.
an officer here provides me with refreshments, and while generously
permitting the population to come in and enjoy the extraordinary spectacle
of seeing me fed, he thoughtfully stations a man with a stick to keep
them at a respectful distance.  a later hour in the afternoon finds me
trundling up a long acclivity leading to the summit of a low mountain
ridge; arriving at the summit i stand on the boundary-line between the
dominions of the sultan and the shah, and i pause a minute to take a
brief, retrospective glance.  the cyclometer, affixed to the bicycle at
constantinople, now registers within a fraction of one thousand miles;
it has been on the whole an arduous thousand miles, but those who in the
foregoing pages have followed me through the strange and varied experiences
of the journey will agree with me when i say that it has proved more
interesting than arduous after all.  i need not here express any blunt
opinions of the different people encountered; it is enough that my
observations concerning them have been jotted down as i have mingled
with them and their characteristics from day to day; almost without
exception, they have treated me the best they knew how; it is only natural
that some should know how better than others.  bidding farewell, then,
to the land of the crescent and the home of the unspeakable osmanli, i
wheel down a gentle slope into a mountain-environed area of cultivated
fields, where persian peasants are busy gathering their harvest.  the
strange apparition observed descending from the summit of the boundary
attracts universal attention; i can hear them calling out to each other,
and can see horsemen come wildly galloping from every direction.  in a
few minutes the road in my immediate vicinity is alive with twenty
prancing steeds; some are bestrode by men who, from the superior quality
of their clothes and the gaudy trappings of their horses, are evidently
in good circumstances; others by wild-looking, barelegged bipeds, whose
horses' trappings consist of nothing but a bridle.  the transformation
brought about by crossing the mountain ridge is novel and complete; the
fez, so omnipresent throughout the ottoman dominions, has disappeared,
as if by magic; the better class persians wear tall, brimless black hats
of astrakan lamb's wool; some of the peasantry wear an unlovely, close-
fitting skullcap of thick gray felt, that looks wonderfully like a bowl
clapped on top of their heads, others sport a huge woolly head-dress
like the roumanians; this latter imparts to them a fierce, war-like
appearance, that the meek-eyed persian ryot (tiller of the soil) is far
from feeling.  the national garment is a sort of frock-coat gathered at
the waist, and with a skirt of ample fulness, reaching nearly to the
knees; among the wealthier class the material of this garment is usually
cloth of a solid, dark color, and among the ryots or peasantry, of calico
or any cheap fabric they can obtain.  loose-fitting pantaloons of european
pattern, and sometimes top-boots, with tops ridiculously ample in their
looseness, characterize the nether garments of the better classes; the
ryots go mostly bare-legged in summer, and wear loose, slipper-like foot-
gear; the soles of both boots and shoes are frequently pointed, and made
to turn up and inwards, after the fashion in england centuries ago.

nightfall overtakes me as, after travelling several miles of variable
road, i commence following a winding trail down into the valley of a
tributary of the arasces toward ovahjik, where resides the pasha khan,
to whom i have a letter; but the crescent-shaped moon sheds abroad a
silvery glimmer that exerts a softening influence upon the mountains
outlined against the ever-arching dome, from whence here and there a
star begins to twinkle.  it is one of those. beautiful, calm autumn
evenings when all nature seems hushed in peaceful slumbers; when the
stars seem to first peep cautiously from the impenetrable depths of their
hiding-place, and then to commence blinking benignantly and approvingly
upon the world; and when the moon looks almost as though fair luna has
been especially decorating herself to embellish a scene that without her
lovely presence would be incomplete.  such is my first autumn evening
beneath the cloudless skies of persia.

soon the village of ovahjik is reached, and some peasants guide me to
the residence of the pasha khan.  the servant who presents my letter of
introduction fills the untutored mind of his master with wonderment
concerning what the peasants have told him about the bicycle.  the pasha
khan makes his appearance without having taken the trouble to open the
envelope.  he is a dull-faced, unintellectual-lookiug personage, and
without any preliminary palaver he says: "bin bacalem," in a dictatorial
tone of voice.  "bacalem yole lazim, bacalem saba," i reply, for it is
too dark to ride on unknown ground this evening.  " bin bacalem, " repeats
the pasha khan, even more dictatorial than before, ordering a servant
to bring a tallow candle, so that i can have no excuse.  there appears
to be such a total absence of all consideration for myself that i am not
disposed to regard very favorably or patiently the obtrusive meddlesomeness
of two younger men-whom i afterward discover to be sons of the pasha
khan - who seem almost inclined to take the bicycle out of my charge
altogether, in their excessive impatience and inordinate inquisitiveness
to examine everything about it.  one of them, thinking the cyclometer to
be a watch, puts his ear down to see if he can hear it tick, and then
persists in fingering it about, to the imminent danger of the tally-pin.
after telling him several times not to meddle with it, and receiving
overbearing gestures in reply, i deliberately throw him backward into
an irrigating ditch.  a gleam of intelligence overspreads the stolid
countenance of the pasha khan at seeing his offspring floundering about
on his back in the mud and water, and he gives utterance to a chuckle
of delight.  the discomfited young man betrays nothing of the spirit of
resentment upon recovering himself from the ditch, and the other son
involuntarily retreats as though afraid his turn was coming next.  the
servant now arrives with the lighted candle, and the pasha kahn leads
the way into his garden, where there is a wide brick-paved walk; the
house occupies one side of the garden, the other three sides are inclosed
by a high mud wall.  after riding a few times along the brick-paved walk,
and promising to do better in the morning.  i naturally expect to be taken
into the house, instead of which the pasha khan orders the people to
show me the way to the caravanserai.  arriving at the caravanserai, and
finding myself thus thrown unexpectedly upon my own resources, i inquire
of some bystanders where i can obtain elcmek; some of them want to know
how many liras i will give for ekmek.  when it is reflected that a lira
is nearly five dollars, one realizes from this something of the
unconscionable possibilities of the persian commercial mind.

while this question is being mooted, a figure appears in the doorway,
toward which the people one and all respectfully salaam and give way.
it is the great pasha khan; he has bethought himself to open my letter
of introduction, and having perused it and discovered who it was from
and all about me, he now comes and squats down in the most friendly
manner by my side for a minute, as though to remove any unfavorable
impressions his inhospitable action in sending me here might have made,
and then bids me accompany him back to his residence.  after permitting
him to eat a sufficiency of humble pie in the shape of coaxing, to atone
for his former incivility, i agree to his proposal and accompany him
back.  tea is at once provided, the now very friendly pasha khan putting
extra lumps of sugar into my glass with his own hands and stirring it
up; bread and cheese comes in with the tea, and under the mistaken
impression that this constitutes the persian evening meal i eat sufficient
to satisfy my hunger.  while thus partaking freely of the bread and cheese,
i do not fail to notice that the others partake very sparingly, and that
they seem to be rather astonished because i am not following their
example.  being chiefly interested in satisfying my appetite, however,
their silent observations have no effect save to further mystify my
understanding of the persian character.  the secret of all this soon
reveals itself in the form of an ample repast of savory chicken pillau,
brought in immediately afterward; and while the pasha khan and his two
sons proceed to do full justice to this highly acceptable dish, i have
to content myself with nibbling at a piece of chicken, and ruminating
on the unhappy and ludicrous mistake of having satisfied my hunger with
dry bread and cheese.  thus does one pay the penalty of being unacquainted
with the domestic customs of a country when first entering upon its
experiences.  there seems to be no material difference between the social
position of the women here and in turkey; they eat their meals by
themselves, and occupy entirely separate apartments, which are unapproachable
to members of the opposite sex save their husbands.  the pasha khan of
ovahjik, however, seems to be a kind, indulgent husband and father,
requesting me next morning to ride up and down the brick-paved walk for
the benefit of his wives and daughters.  in the seclusion of their own
walled premises the persian females are evidently not so particular about
concealing their features, and i obtained a glimpse of some very pretty
faces; oval faces with large dreamy black eyes, and a flush of warm
sunset on brownish cheeks.  the indoor costume of persian women is but
an inconsiderable improvement upon the costume of our ancestress in the
garden of eden, and over this they hastily don a flimsy shawl-like garment
to come out and see me ride.  they are always much less concerned about
concealing their nether extremities than about their faces, and as they
seem but little concerned about anything on this occasion save the
bicycle, after riding for them i have to congratulate myself that, so
far as sight-seeing is concerned, the ladies leave me rather under
obligations than otherwise.

after supper the pasha khan's falconer brings in several fine falcons
for my inspection, and in reply to questions concerning one with his
eyelids tied up in what appears to be a cruel manner, i am told that
this is the customary way of breaking the spirits of the young falcons
and rendering them tractable and submissive  the eyelids are pierced
with a hole, a silk thread is then fastened to each eyelid and the ends
tied together over the head, sufficiently tight to prevent them opening
their eyes.  falconing is considered the chief out-door sport of the
persian nobility, but the average persian is altogether too indolent for
out-door sport, and the keeping of falcons is fashionable, because
regarded as a sign of rank and nobility rather than for sport.  in the
morning the pasha khan is wonderfully agreeable, and appears anxious to
atone as far as possible for the little incivility of yesterday evening,
and to remove any unfavorable impressions i may perchance entertain of
him on that account before i leave.  his two sons and a couple of soldiers
accompany me on horseback some distance up the valley.  the valley is
studded with villages, and at the second one we halt at the residence
of a gentleman named abbas koola khan, and partake of tea and light
refreshments in his garden.  here i learn that the pasha khan has carried
his good intentions to the extent of having made arrangements to provide
me armed escort from point to point; how far ahead this well-meaning
arrangement is to extend i am unable to understand; neither do i care
to find out, being already pretty well convinced that the escort will
prove an insufferable nuisance to be gotten rid of at the first favorable
opportunity.  abbas koola khan now joins the company until we arrive at
the summit of a knoll commanding an extensive view of my road ahead so
they can stand and watch me when they all bid me farewell save the soldier
who is to accompany me further on.  as we shake hands, the young man whom
i pushed into the irrigating ditch, points to a similar receptacle near
by and shakes his head with amusing solemnity; whether this is expressive
of his sorrow that i should have pushed him in, or that he should have
annoyed me to the extent of having deserved it, i cannot say; probably
the latter.  my escort, though a soldier, is dressed but little different
from the better-class villagers; he is an almond-eyed individual, with
more of the tartar cast of countenance than the persian.  besides the
short persian sword, he is armed with a martini henry rifle of the 1862
pattern; numbers of these rifles having found their way into the hands
of turks, koords and persians, since the russoturkish war.  my predictions
concerning his turning out an insupportable nuisance are not suffered
to remain long unverified, for he appears to consider it his chief duty
to gallop ahead and notify the villagers of my approach, and to work
them up to the highest expectations concerning my marvellous appearance.
the result of all this is a swelling of his own importance at having so
wonderful a person under his protection, and my own transformation from
an unostentatious traveller to something akin to a free circus for crowds
of barelegged ryots.  i soon discover that, with characteristic persian
truthfulness, he has likewise been spreading the interesting report that
i am journeying in this extraordinary manner to carry a message from the
"ingilis shah " to the "shah in shah of iran " (the persians know their
own country as iran) thereby increasing his own importance and the
wonderment of the people concerning myself.  the persian villages, so
far, are little different from the turkish, but such valuable property
as melon-gardens, vineyards, etc., instead of being presided over by a
watchman, are usually surrounded by substantial mud walls ten or twelve
feet high.  the villagers themselves, being less improvident and altogether
more thoughtful of number one than the turks, are on the whole, a trifle
less ragged; but that is saying very little indeed, and their condition
is anything but enviable.  during the summer they fare comparatively well,
needing but little clothing, and they are happy and contented in the
absence of actual suffering; they are perfectly satisfied with a diet
of bread and fruit and cucumbers, rarely tasting meat of any kind.  but
fuel is as scarce as in asia minor, and like the turks and armenians,
in winter they have resource to a peculiar and economical arrangement
to keep themselves warm; placing a pan of burning tezek beneath a low
table, the whole family huddle around it, covering the table and themselves
-save of course their heads-up with quilts; facing each other in this
ridiculous manner, they chat and while away the dreary days of winter.

at the third village after leaving the sons of the pasha khan, my tartar-
eyed escort, with much garrulous injunction to his successor, delivers
me over to another soldier, himself returning back; this is my favorable
opportunity, and soon after leaving the village i bid my valiant protector
return.  the man seems totally unable to comprehend why i should order
him to leave me, and makes an elaborate display of his pantomimic abilities
to impress upon me the information that the country ahead is full of
very bad koords, who will kill and rob me if i venture among them
unprotected by a soldier.  the expressive action of drawing the finger
across the throat appears to be the favorite method of signifying personal
danger among all these people; but i already understand that the persians
live in deadly fear of the nomad koords.  consequently his warnings,
although evidently sincere, fall on biased ears, and i peremptorily order
him to depart.  the tabreez trail is now easily followed without a guide,
and with a sense of perfect freedom and unrestraint, that is destroyed
by having a horseman cantering alongside one, i push ahead, finding the
roads variable, and passing through several villages during the day.  the
chief concern of the ryots is to detain me until they can bring the
resident khan to see me ride, evidently from a servile desire to cater
to his pleasure.  they gather around me and prevent my departure until
he arrives.  an appeal to the revolver will invariably secure my release,
but one naturally gets ashamed of threatening people's lives even under
the exasperating circumstances of a forcible detention.  once to-day i
managed to outwit them beautifully.  pretending acquiescence in their
proposition of waiting till the arrival of their khan, i propose mounting
and riding a few yards for their own edification while waiting; in their
eagerness to see they readily fall into the trap, and the next minute
sees me flying down the road with a swarm of bare-legged ryots in full
chase after me, yelling for me to stop.  fortunately, they have no horses
handy, but some of these lanky fellows can run like deer almost, and
nothing but an excellent piece of road enables me to outdistance my
pursuers.  wily as the persians are, compared to the osmanlis, one could
play this game on them quite frequently, owing to their eagerness to see
the bicycle ridden; but it is seldom that the road is sufficiently smooth
to justify the attempt.  i was gratified to learn from the persian consul
at erzeroum that my stock of turkish would answer me as far as teheran,
the people west of the capital speaking a dialect known as tabreez
turkish; still, i find quite a difference.  almost every persian points
to the bicycle and says: "boo; ndmi ndder.  " ("this; what is it?") and
it is several days ere i have an opportunity of finding out exactly what
they mean.  they are also exceedingly prolific in using the endearing
term of kardash when accosting me.  the distance is now reckoned by
farsakhs (roughly, four miles) instead of hours; but, although the farsakh
is a more tangible and comprehensive measurement than the turkish hour,
in reality it is almost as unreliable to go by.  towards evening i ascend
into a more mountainous region, inhabited exclusively by nomad koords;
from points of vantage their tents are observable clustered here and
there at the bases of the mountains.  descending into a grassy valley or
depression, i find myself in close proximity to several different camps,
and eagerly avail myself of the opportunity to pass a night among them.
i am now in the heart of northern koordistan, which embraces both persian
and turkish territory, and the occasion is most opportune for seeing
something of these wild nomads in their own mountain pastures.  the
greensward is ridable, and i dismount before the sheikh's tent in the
presence of a highly interested and interesting audience.  the half-wild
dogs make themselves equally interesting in another and a less desirable
sense as i approach, but the men pelt them with stones, and when i
dismount they conduct me and the bicycle at once into the tent of their
chieftain.  the sheikh's tent is capacious enough to shelter a regiment
almost, and it is divided into compartments similar to a previous
description; the sheikh is a big, burly fellow, of about forty-five,
wearing a turban the size of a half-bushel measure, and dressed pretty
much like a well-to-do turk; as a matter of fact, the koords admire the
osmanlis and despise the persians.  the bicycle is reclined against a
carpet partition, and after the customary interchange of questions, a
splendid fellow, who must be six feet six inches tall, and broad-shouldered
in proportion, squats himself cross-legged beside me, and proceeds to
make himself agreeable, rolling me cigarettes, asking questions, and
curiously investigating anything about me that strikes him as peculiar.
i show them, among other things, a cabinet photograph of myself in all
the glory of needle-pointed mustache and dress-parade apparel; after a
critical examination and a brief conference among themselves they pronounce
me an "english pasha." i then hand the sheikh a set of sketches, but
they are not sufficiently civilized to appreciate the sketches; they
hold them upside down and sidewise; and not being able to make anything
out of them, the sheikh holds them in his hand and looks quite embarrassed,
like a person in possession of something he doesn't know what to do with.
noticing that the women are regarding these proceedings with much interest
from behind a low partition, and not having yet become reconciled to the
mohammedan idea of women being habitually ignored and overlooked, i
venture upon taking the photograph to them; they seem much confused at
finding themselves the object of direct attention, and they appear several
degrees wilder than the men, so far as comprehending such a product of
civilization as a photograph is an indication.  it requires more material
objects than sketches and photos to meet the appreciation of these semi-
civilized children of the desert.  they bring me their guns and spears
to look at and pronounce upon, and then my stalwart entertainer grows
inquisitive about my revolver.  first extracting the cartridges to prevent
accident, i hand it to him, and he takes it for the sheikh's inspection.
the sheikh examines the handsome little smith & wesson long and wistfully,
and then toys with it several minutes, apparently reluctant about having
to return it; finally he asks me to give him a cartridge and let him go
out and test its accuracy.  i am getting a trifle uneasy at his evident
covetousness of the revolver, and in this request i see my opportunity
of giving him to understand that it would be a useless weapon for him
to possess, by telling him i have but a few cartridges and that others
are not procurable in koordistan or neighboring countries.  recognizing
immediately its uselessness to him under such circumstances, he then
returns it without remark; whether he would have confiscated it without
this timely explanation, it is difficult to say.

shortly after the evening meal, an incident occurs which causes considerable
amusement.  everything being unusually quiet, one sharp-eared youth happens
to hear the obtrusive ticking of my waterbury, and strikes a listening
attitude, at which everybody else likewise begins listening; the tick,
tick is plainly discernible to everybody in the compartment and they
become highly interested and amused, and commence looking at me for an
explanation.  with a view to humoring the spirit of amusement thus awakened,
i likewise smile, but affect ignorance and innocence concerning the
origin of the mysterious ticking, and strike a listening attitude as
well as the others.  presuming upon our interchange of familiarity, our
six-foot-sixer then commences searching about my clothing for the watch,
but being hidden away in a pantaloon fob, and minus a chain, it proves
beyond his power of discovery.  nevertheless, by bending his head down
and listening, he ascertains and announces it to be somewhere about my
person; the waterbury is then produced, and the loudness of its ticking
awakes the wonder and admiration of the koords, even to a greater extent
than the turks.  during the evening, the inevitable question of euss,
osmanli, and english crops up, and i win unanimous murmurs of approval
by laying my forefingers together and stating that the english and the
osmanlis are kardash.  i show them my turkish teskeri, upon which several
of them bestow fervent kisses, and when, by means of placing several
stones here and there i explained to them how in 1877, the hated muscov
occupied different mussulman cities one after the other, and was prevented
by the english from occupying their dearly beloved stamboul itself, their
admiration knows no bounds.  along the trail, not over a mile from camp,
a large persian caravan has been halting during the day; late in the
evening loud shouting and firing of guns announces them as prepared to
start on their night's journey.  it is customary when going through this
part of koordistan for the caravan men to fire guns and make as much
noise as possible, in order to impress the koords with exaggerated
ideas concerning their strength and number; everybody in the sheikh's
tent thoroughly understands the meaning of the noisy demonstration, and
the men exchange significant smiles.  the firing and the shouting produce
a truly magical effect upon a blood-thirsty youngster of ten or twelve
summers; he becomes wildly hilarious, gamboling about the tent, and
rolling over and kicking up his heels.  he then goes to the sheikh, points
to me, and draws his finger across his throat, intimating that he would
like the privilege of cutting somebody's throat, and why not let him cut
mine.  the sheikh and others laugh at this, but instead of chiding him
for his tragical demonstration, they favor him with the same admiring
glances that grown people bestow upon precocious youngsters the world
over.  under these circumstances of abject fear on the one hand, and
inbred propensity for violence and plunder on the other, it is really
surprising to find the koords in persian territory behaving themselves
as well as they do.  quilts are provided for me, and i occupy this same
compartment of the tent, in common with several of the younger men.  in
the morning, before departing, i am regaled with bread and rich, new
cream, and when leaving the tent i pause a minute to watch the busy scene
in the female department.  some are churning butter in sheep-skin churns
which are suspended from poles and jerked back and forth; others are
weaving carpets, preparing curds for cheese, baking bread, and otherwise
industriously employed.  i depart from the koordish camp thoroughly
satisfied with my experience of their hospitality, but the cerulean
waist-scarf bestowed upon me by our hungarian friend igali, at belgrade,
no longer adds its embellishments to my personal adornments.  whenever a
favorable opportunity presents, certain young men belonging to the noble
army of hangers-on about the sheikh's apartments invariably glide inside,
and importune the guest from frangistan for any article of his clothing
that excites the admiration of their semi-civilized minds.  this scarf,
they were doubtless penetrating enough to observe, formed no necessary
part of my wardrobe, and a dozen times in the evening, and again in the
morning, i was worried to part with it, so i finally presented it to one
of them.  he hastily hid it away among his clothes and disappeared, as
though fearful, either that the sheikh might see it and make him return
it, or that one of the chieftain's favorites might take a fancy to it
and summarily appropriate it to his own use.

not more than five miles eastward from the camp, while trundling over a
stretch of stony ground, i am accosted by a couple of koordiah shepherds;
but as the country immediately around is wild and unfrequented, save by
koords, and knowing something of their little weaknesses toward travellers
under tempting, one-sided conditions, i deem it advisable to pay as
little heed to them as possible.  seeing that i have no intention of
halting, they come running up, and undertake to forcibly detain me by
seizing hold of the bicycle, at the same time making no pretence of
concealing their eager curiosity concerning the probable contents of my
luggage.  naturally disapproving of this arbitrary conduct, i push them
roughly away.  with a growl more like the voice of a wild animal than of
human beings, one draws his sword and the other picks up a thick knobbed
stick that he had dropped in order to the better pinch and sound my
packages.  without giving them time to reveal whether they seriously
intend attacking me, or only to try intimidation, i have them nicely
covered with the smith & wesson.  they seem to comprehend in a moment
that i have them at a disadvantage, and they hurriedly retreat a short
distance, executing a series of gyral antics, as though expecting me to
fire at their legs.  they are accompanied by two dogs, tawny-coated
monsters, larger than the largest mastiffs, who now proceed to make
things lively and interesting around myself and the bicycle.  keeping the
revolver in my hand, and threatening to shoot their dogs if they don't
call them away, i continue my progress toward where the stony ground
terminates in favor of smooth camel-paths, about' a hundred yards farther
on.  at this juncture i notice several other "gentle shepherds " coming
racing down from the adjacent knolls; but whether to assist their comrades
in catching and robbing me, or to prevent a conflict between us, will
always remain an uncertainty.  i am afraid, however, that with the advantage
on their side, the koordish herdsmen rarely trouble themselves about any
such uncongenial task as peace-making.  reaching the smooth ground before
any of the new-comers overtake me, i mount and speed away, followed by
wild yells from a dozen koordish throats, and chased by a dozen of their
dogs.  upon sober second thought, when well away from the vicinity, i
conclude this to have been a rather ticklish incident; had they attacked
me in the absence of anything else to defend myself with, i should have
been compelled to shoot them; the nearest persian village is about ten
miles distant; the absence of anything like continuously ridable road
would have made it impossible to out-distance their horsemen, and a
persian village would have afforded small security against a party of
enraged koords, after all.  the first village i arrive at to-day, i again
attempt the "skedaddling" dodge on them that proved so successful on
one occasion yesterday; but i am foiled by a rocky "jump-off" in the
road to-day.  the road is not so favorable for spurting as yesterday,
and the racing ryots grab me amid much boisterous merriment ere * i
overcome the obstruction; they take particular care not to give me another
chance until the arrival of the khan.  the country hereabouts consists
of gravelly, undulating plateaus between the mountains, and well-worn
camel-paths afford some excellent wheeling.  near mid-day, while laboriously
ascending a long but not altogether unridable ascent, i meet a couple
of mounted soldiers; they obstruct my road, and proceed to deliver
themselves of voluble tabreez turkish, by which i understand that they
are the advance guard of a party in which there is a ferenghi (the persian
term for an occidental).  while talking with them i am somewhat taken by
surprise at seeing a lady on horseback and two children in a kajaveh
(mule panier) appear over the slope, accompanied by about a dozen persians.

if i am surprised, the lady herself not unnaturally evinces even greater
astonishment at the apparition of a lone wheelman here on the caravan
roads of persia; of course we are mutually delighted.  with the assistance
of her servant, the lady alights from the saddle and introduces herself
as mrs. e--, the wife of one of the persian missionaries; her husband
has lately returned home, and she is on the way to join him.  the persians
accompanying her comprise her own servants, some soldiers procured of
the governor of tabreez by the english consul to escort her as far as
the turkish frontier, and a couple of unattached travellers keeping with
the party for company and society.  a mule driver has charge of pack-mules
carrying boxes containing, among other things, her husband's library.
during the course of ten minutes' conversation the lady informs me that
she is compelled to travel in this manner the whole distance to trebizond,
owing to the practical impossibility of passing through bussian territory
with the library.  were it not for this a comparatively short and easy
journey would take them to tiflis, from which point there would be steam
communication with europe.  ere the poor lady gets to trebizond she will
be likely to reflect that a government so civilized as the czar's might
relax its gloomy laws sufficiently to allow the affixing of official
seals to a box of books, and permit its transportation through the
country, on condition-if they will-that it should not be opened in
transit; surely there would be no danger of the people's minds being
enlightened -not even a little bit-by coming in contact with a library
tightly boxed and sealed.  at the frontier an escort of turkish zaptiehs
will take the place of the persian soldiers, and at erzeroum the
missionaries will, of course, render her every assistance to trebizond;
but it is not without feelings of anxiety for the health of a lady
travelling in this rough manner unaccompanied by her natural protector,
that i reflect on the discomforts she must necessarily put up with
between here and erzeroum.  she seems in good spirits, however, and says
that meeting me here in this extraordinary manner is the "most romantic"
incident in her whole experiences of missionary life in persia.  like
many another, she says, she can i scarcely conceive it possible that i
am travelling without attendants and without being able to speak the
languages.  one of the unattached travellers gives me a note of
introduction to mohammed.  ali khan, the governor of peri, a suburban
village of khoi, which i expect to reach some time this afternoon.






chapter xix.




persia and the tabreez caravan trail.

a short trundle to the summit of a sloping pass, and then a winding
descent of several miles brings me to a position commanding a view of
an extensive valley that looks from this distance as lovely as a dreamy
vision of paradise.  an hour later and i am bowling along beneath overhanging
peach and mulberry trees, following a volunteer horseman to mohammed ali
khan's garden.  before reaching the garden a gang of bare-legged laborers
engaged in patching up a mud wall favor me with a fusillade of stones,
one of which caresses me on the ankle, and makes me limp like a greenwich
pensioner when i dismount a minute or two afterward.  this is their
peculiar way of complimenting a lone ferenghi.  mohammed ali khan is found
to be rather a moon-faced individual under thirty, who, together with
his subordinate officials, are occupying tents in a large garden.  here,
during the summer, they dispense justice to applicants for the same
within their jurisdiction, and transact such other official business as
is brought before them.  in persi, the distribution of justice consists
chiefly in the officials ruthlessly looting the applicants of everything
lootable, and the weightiest task of the officials is intriguing together
against the pocket of the luckless wight who ventures upon seeking equity
at their hands.  a sorrowful-visaged husbandman is evidently experiencing
the easy simplicity of persian civil justice as i enter the garden; he
wears the mournful expression of a man conscious of being irretrievably
doomed, while the festive kahn and his equally festive moonshi bashi
(chief secretary) are laying their wicked heads together and whispering
mysteriously, fifty paces away from everybody, ever and anon looking
suspiciously around as though fearful of the presence of eavesdroppers.
after duly binning, a young man called abdullah, who seems to be at the
beck and call of everybody, brings forth the samovar, and we drink the
customary tea of good fellowship, after which they examine such of my
modest effects as take their fancy.  the moonshi bashi, as becomes a man
of education, is quite infatuated with my pocket map of persia; the fact
that persia occupies so great a space on the map in comparison with the
small portions of adjoining countries visible around the edges makes a
powerful appeal to his national vanity, and he regards me with increased
affection every time i trace out for him the comprehensive boundary line
of his native iran.  after nightfall we repair to the principal tent, and
mohammed ali khan and his secretary consume the evening hours in the
joyous occupation of alternately smoking the kalian (persian water-pipe,
not unlike the turkish nargileh, except that it has a straight stem
instead of a coiled tube), and swallowing glasses of raw arrack every
few minutes; they furthermore amuse themselves by trying to induce me
to follow their noble example, and in poking fun at another young man
because his conscientious scruples regarding the mohammedan injunction
against intoxicants forbids him indulging with them.  about eight o'clock
the khan becomes a trifle sentimental and very patriotic.  producing a
pair of silver-mounted horse-pistols from a corner of the tent, and
waving them theatrically about, he proclaims aloud his mighty devotion
to the shah.  at nine o'clock abdullah brings in the supper.  the khan's
vertebra has become too limp and willowy to enable him to sit upright,
and he has become too indifferent to such coarse, un-spiritual things
as stewed chicken and musk-melons to care about eating any, while the
moonshi bashi's affection for me on account of the map has become so
overwhelming that he deliberately empties all the chicken on to my sheet
of bread, leaving none whatever for himself and the phenomenal young
person with the conscientious scruples.

when bedtime arrives it requires the united exertions of abdullah and
the phenomenal young man to partially undress mohammed ali khan and drag
him to his couch on the floor, the kahn being limp as a dish-rag and a
moderately bulky person.  the moonshi bashi, as becomes an individual of
lesser rank and superior mental attainments, is not quite so helpless
as his official superior, but on retiring he humorously reposes his feet
on the pillow and his head on nothing but the bare floor of the tent,
and stubbornly refuses to permit abdullah to alter either his pillow or
his position.  the phenomenal young man and myself likewise seek our
respective pile of quilts, abdullah removes the lamp, draws a curtain
over the entrance of the tent, and retires.

the persians, as representing the shiite division of the mohammedan
religion, consider themselves by long odds the holiest people on the
earth, far holier than the turks, whom they religiously despise as
sunnites and unworthy to loose the latchets of their shoes.  the koran
strictly enjoins upon them great moderation in the use of intoxicating
drinks, yet certain of the persian nobility are given to drinking this
raw intoxicant by the quart daily.  when asked why they don't use it in
moderation, they reply, " what is the good of drinking arrack unless one
drinks enough to become drunk and happy.  " following this brilliant idea,
many of them get " drank and happy " regularly every evening.  they
likewise frequently consume as much as a pint before each meal to create
a false appetite and make themselves feel boozy while eating.  in the
morning the moonshi bashi, with a soldier for escort, accompanies me on
horseback to khoi, which is but about seven miles distant over a perfectly
level road.  sad to say, the moonshi bashi, besides his yearning affection
for fiery, untamed arrack, is a confirmed opium smoker, and after last
night's debauch for supper and "hitting the pipe " this morning for
breakfast, he doesn't feel very dashing in the saddle; consequently i
have to accommodate myself to his pace.  it is the slowest seven miles
ever ridden on the road by a wheelman, i think; a funeral procession is
a lively, rattling affair, beside our onward progress toward the mud
battlements of khoi, but there is no help for it.  whenever i venture to
the fore a little the dreamy-eyed moonshi bashi regards me with a gaze
of mild reproachfulness, and sings out in a gently-chide-the-erring tone
of voice: "kardash.  kardash." meaning " f we are brothers, why do you
seem to want to leave me."  human nature could scarcely be proof against
an appeal wherein endearment and reproach are so beautifully and
harmoniously blended, and it always brings me back to a level with his
horse.  reaching the suburbs of khoi, i am initiated into a new departure - new
to myself at this time - of persian sanctimoniousness.  halting at a fountain
to obtain a drink, the soldier shapes himself for pouring the water out
of the earthenware drinking vessel into my hands; supposing this to be
merely an indication of the persian's own method of drinking, i motion
my preference for drinking out of the jar itself.  the soldier looks
appealingly toward the moonshi bashi, who tells him to let me drink, and
then orders him to smash the jar.  it then dawns upon my unenlightened
mind, that being a ferenghi, i should have known better than to have
touched my unhallowed lips to a drinking vessel at a public fountain,
defiling it by so doing, so that it must be smashed in order that the
sons of the "true prophet" may not unwittingly drink from it afterward
and themselves become defiled.  the moonshi bashi pilots me to the residence
of a certain wealthy citizen outside the city walls; this person, a mild-
mannered, purring-voiced man, is seated in a room with a couple of
seyuds, or descendants of the prophet; they are helping themselves from
a large platter of the finest, pears, peaches, and egg plums i ever saw
anywhere.  the room is carpeted with costly rugs and carpets in which
one's feet sink perceptibly at every step; the walls and ceiling are
artistically stuccoed, and the doors and windows are gay with stained
glass.  abandoning myself to the guidance of the moonshi bashi, i ride
around the garden-walks, show them the bicycle, revolver, map of persia,
etc.; like the moonshi bashi, they become deeply interested in the map,
finding much amusement and satisfaction in having me point out the
location of different persian cities, seemingly regarding my ability to
do so as evidence of exceeding cleverness and erudition.  the untravelled
persians of the northern provinces regard teheran as the grand idea of
a large and important city; if there is any place in the whole world
larger and more important, they think it may perhaps be stamboul.  the
fact that stamboul is not on my map while teheran is, they regard as
conclusive proof  of the superiority of their own capital.  the moonshi
bashi's chief purpose in accompanying me hither has been to introduce
me to the attention of the "hoikim"; although the pronunciation is a
little different from hakim, i attribute this to local brogue, and have
been surmising this personage to be some doctor, who, perhaps, having
graduated at a frangistan medical college, the moonshi bashi thinks will
be able to converse with me.  after partaking of fruit and tea we continue
on our way to the nearest gate-way of the city proper, khoi being
surrounded by a ditch and battlemented mud wall.  arriving at a large,
public inclosure, my guide sends in a letter, and shortly afterward
delivers me over to some soldiers, who forthwith conduct me into the
presence of - not a doctor, but ali khan, the governor of the city, an
officer who hereabouts rejoices in the title of the "hoikim." the
governor proves to be a man of superior intelligence; he has been persian
ambassador to france some time ago, and understands french fairly well;
consequently we manage to understand each other after a fashion.  although
he has never before seen a bicycle, his knowledge of the mechanical
ingenuity of the ferenghis causes him to regard it with more intelligence
than an un-travelled native, and to better comprehend my journey and its
object.  assisted by a dozen mollahs (priests) and officials in flowing
gowns and henna-tinted beards and finger-nails, the governor is transacting
official business, and he invites me to come into the council chamber
and be seated.  in a few minutes the noon-tide meal is announced; the
governor invites me to dine with them, and then leads the way into the
dining-room, followed by his counsellors, who form in line behind him
according to their rank.  the dining-room is a large, airy apartment,
opening into an extensive garden; a bountiful repast is spread on yellow-
checkered tablecloths on the carpeted floor; the governor squats cross-
legged at one end, the stately-looking wiseacres in flowing gowns range
themselves along each side in a similar attitude, with much solemnity
and show of dignity; they - at least so i fancy - evidently are anything but
rejoiced at the prospect of eating with an infidel ferenghi.  the governor,
being a far more enlightened and consequently less bigoted personage,
looks about him a trifle embarrassed, as if searching for some place
where he can seat me in a position of becoming honor without offending
the prejudices of his sanctimonious counsellors.  noticing this, i at
once come to his relief by taking the position farthest from him,
attempting to imitate them in their cross-legged attitude.  my unhappy
attempt to sit in this uncomfortable attitude - uncomfortable at least to
anybody unaccustomed to it - provokes a smile from his excellency, and he
straightway orders an attendant to fetch in a chair and a small table;
the counsellors look on in silence, but they are evidently too deeply
impressed with their own dignity and holiness to commit themselves to
any such display of levity as a smile.  a portion of each dish is placed
upon my table, together with a travellers' combination knife, fork and
spoon, a relic, doubtless, of the governor's parisian experience.  his
excellency having waited and kept the counsellors waiting until these
preparations are finished, motions for me to commence eating, and then
begins himself.  the repast consists of boiled mutton, rice pillau with
curry, mutton chops, hard-boiled eggs with lettuce, a pastry of sweetened
rice-flour, musk-melons, water-melons, several kinds of fruit, and for
beverage glasses of iced sherbet; of all the company i alone use knife,
fork, and plates.  before each persian is laid a broad sheet of bread;
bending their heads over this they scoop up small handfuls of pillau,
and toss it dextrously into their mouths; scattering particles missing
the expectantly opened receptacle fall back on to the bread; this handy
sheet of bread is used as a plate for placing a chop or anything else
on, as a table-napkin for wiping finger-tips between courses, and now
and then a piece is pulled off and eaten.  when the meal is finished, an
attendant waits on each guest with a brazen bowl, an ewer of water and
a towel.  after the meal is over the governor is no longer handicapped
by the religious prejudices of the mollahs, and leaving them he invites
me into the garden to see his two little boys go through their gymnastic
exercises.  they are clever little fellows of about seven and nine,
respectively, with large black eyes and clear olive complexions; all
the time we are watching them the governor's face is wreathed in a fond,
parental smile.  the exercises consist chiefly in climbing a thick rope
dangling from a cross-beam.  after seeing me ride the bicycle the governor
wants me to try my hand at gymnastics, but being nothing of a gymnast i
respectfully beg to be excused.  while thus enjoying a pleasant hour in
the garden, a series of resounding thwacks are heard somewhere near by,
and looking around some intervening shrubs i observe a couple of far-rashes
bastinadoing a culprit; seeing me more interested in this novel method
of administering justice than in looking at the youngsters trying to
climb ropes, the governor leads the way thither.  the man, evidently a
ryot, is lying on his back, his feet are lashed together and held soles
uppermost by means of an horizontal pole, while the farrashes briskly
belabor them with willow sticks.  the soles of the ryot's feet are hard
and thick as rhinoceros hide almost from habitually walking barefooted,
and under these conditions his punishment is evidently anything but
severe.  the flagellation goes merrily and uninterruptedly forward until
fifty sticks about five feet long and thicker than a person's thumb are
broken over his feet without eliciting any signals of distress from the
horny-hoofed ryot, except an occasional sorrowful groan of "a-l-l-ah."
he is then loosed and limps painfully away, but it looks like a rather
hypocritical limp, after all; fifty sticks, by the by, is a comparatively
light punishment, several hundred sometimes being broken at a single
punishment.  upon taking my leave the governor kindly details a couple
of soldiers to show me to the best caravanserai, and to remain and protect
me from the worry and annoyance of the crowds until my departure from
the city.  arriving at the caravanserai, my valiant protectors undertake
to keep the following crowd from entering the courtyard; the crowd refuses
to see the justice of this arbitrary proceeding, and a regular pitched
battle ensues in the gateway.  the caravanserai-jees reinforce the soldiers,
and by laying on vigorously with thick sticks, they finally put the
rabble to flight.  they then close the caravanserai gates until the
excitement has subsided.  khoi is a city of perhaps fifty thousand
inhabitants, and among them all there is no one able to speak a word of
english.  contemplating the surging mass of woolly-hatted persians from
the bala-khana (balcony; our word is taken from the persian), of the
caravanserai, and hearing nothing but unintelligible language, i detect
myself unconsciously recalling the lines: " oh it was pitiful; in a whole
city full--." it is the first large city i have visited without finding
somebody capable of speaking at least a few words of my own language.
locking the bicycle up, i repair to the bazaar, my watchful and zealous
attendants making the dust fly from the shoulders of such unlucky wights
whose eager inquisitiveness to obtain a good close look brings them
within the reach of their handy staves.  we are followed by immense crowds,
a ferenghi being a rara avis in khoi, and the fame of the wonderful asp-
i (horse of iron) has spread like wild-fire through the city.  in the
bazaar i obtain russian silver money, which is the chief currency of the
country as far east as zendjan.  partly to escape from the worrying crowds,
and partly to ascertain the way out next morning, as i intend making an
early start, i get the soldiers to take me outside the city wall and
show me the tabreez road.

a new caravanserai is in process of construction just outside the tabreez
gate, and i become an interested spectator of the persian mode of building
the walls of a house; these of the new caravanserai are nearly four feet
thick.  parallel walls of mud bricks are built up, leaving an interspace
of two feet or thereabouts; this is filled with stiff, well-worked mud,
which is dumped in by bucketsful and continually tramped by barefooted
laborers; harder bricks are used for the doorways and windows.  the
bricklayer uses mud for mortar and his hands for a trowel; he works
without either level or plumb-line, and keeps up a doleful, melancholy
chant from morning to night.  the mortar is handed to him by an assistant
by handsful; every workman is smeared and spattered with mud from head
to foot, as though glorying in covering themselves with the trade-mark
of their calling.

strolling away from the busy builders we encounter a man the "water
boy of the gang"-  bringing a three-gallon pitcher of water from a
spring half a mile away.  being thirsty, the soldiers shout for him to
bring the pitcher.  scarcely conceiving it possible that these humble
mud-daubers would be so wretchedly sanctimonious, i drink from the jar,
much to the disgust of the poor water-carrier, who forthwith empties
the remainder away and returns with hurried trot to the spring for a
fresh supply; he would doubtless have smashed the vessel had it been
smaller and of lesser value.  naturally i feel a trifle conscience-stricken
at having caused him so much trouble, for he is rather an elderly man,
but the soldiers display no sympathy for him whatever, apparently regarding
an humble water-carrier as a person of small consequence anyhow, and
they laugh heartily at seeing him trotting briskly back half a mile for
another load.  had he taken the first water after a ferenghi had drank
from it and allowed his fellow-workmen to unwittingly partake of the
same, it would probably have fared badly with the old fellow had they
found it out afterward.

returning cityward we meet our friend, the moonshi bashi, looking me up;
he is accompanied by a dozen better-class persians, scattering friends
and acquaintances of his, whom he hag collected during the day chiefly
to show them my map of persia; the mechanical beauty of the bicycle and
the apparent victory over the laws of equilibrium in riding it being,
in the opinion of the scholarly moonshi bashi, quite overshadowed by a
map which shows teheran and khoi, and doesn't show stamboul, and which
shows the whole broad expanse of persia, and only small portions of other
countries.  this latter fact seems to have made a very deep impression
upon the moonshi banhi's mind; it appears to have filled him with the
unalterable conviction that all other countries are insignificant compared
with persia; in his own mind this patriotic person has always believed
this to be the case, but he is overjoyed at finding his belief verified -
as he fondly imagines - by the map of a ferenghi.  returning to the
caravanserai, we find the courtyard crowded with people, attracted by
the fame of the bicycle.  the moonshi bashi straightway ascends to the
bala-khana, tenderly unfolds my map, and displays it for the inspection
of the gaping multitude below; while five hundred pairs of eyes gaze
wonderingly upon it, without having the slightest conception of what
they are looking at, he proudly traces with his finger the outlines of
persia.  it is one of the most amusing scenes imaginable; the moonshi
bashi and myself, surrounded by his little company of friends, occupying
the bala-khana, proudly displaying to a mixed crowd of fully five hundred
people a shilling map as a thing to be wondered at and admired.

after the departure of the moonshi bashi and his friends, by invitation
i pay a visit of curiosity to a company of dervishes (they themselves
pronounce it "darwish") occupying one of the caravanserai rooms.  there
are eight of them lolling about in one small room; their appearance is
disgusting and yet interesting; they are all but naked in deference to
the hot weather and to obtain a little relief from the lively tenants
of their clothing.  prominent among their effects are panther or leopard
skins which they use as cloaks, small steel battle-axes, and huge spiked
clubs.  their whole appearance is most striking and extraordinary; their
long black hair is dangling about their naked shoulders; they have the
wild, haggard countenances of men whose lives are being spent in debauchery
and excesses; nevertheless, most of them have a decidedly intellectual
expression.  the persian dervishes are a strange and interesting people;
they spend their whole lives in wandering from one end of the country
to another, subsisting entirely by mendicancy; yet their cry, instead
of a beggar's supplication for charity, is "huk, huk" (my right, my
right); they affect the most wildly, picturesque and eccentric costumes,
often wearing nothing whatever but white cotton drawers and a leopard
or panther skin thrown, carelessly about their shoulders, besides which
they carry a huge spiked club or steel battle-axe and an alms-receiver;
this latter is usually made of an oval gourd, polished and suspended
on small brass chains.  sometimes they wear an embroidered conical cap
decorated with verses from the koran, but often they wear no head-gear
save the covering provided by nature.  the better-class persians have
little respect for these wandering fakirs; but their wild, eccentric
appearance makes a deep impression upon the simple-hearted villagers,
and the dervishes, whose wits are sharpened by constant knocking about,
live mostly by imposing on their good nature and credulity.  a couple of
these worthies, arriving at a small village, affect their wildest and
most grotesque appearance and proceed to walk with stately, majestic
tread through the streets, gracefully brandishing their clubs or battle-
axes, gazing fixedly at vacancy and reciting aloud from the koran with
a peculiar and impressive intonation; they then walk about the village
holding out their alms-receiver and shouting "huk yah huk! huk yah huk "
half afraid of incurring their displeasure, few of the villagers
refuse to contribute a copper or portable cooked provisions.  most dervishes
are addicted to the intemperate use of opium, bhang (a preparation of
indian hemp), arrack, and other baleful intoxicants, generally indulging
to excess whenever they have collected sufficient money; they are likewise
credited with all manner of debauchery; it is this that accounts for
their pale, haggard appearance.  the following quotation from "in the
land of the lion and sun," and which is translated from the persian, is
eloquently descriptive of the general appearance of the dervish: the
dervish had the dullard air, the maddened look, the vacant stare, that
bhang and contemplation give.  he moved, but did not seem to live; his
gaze was savage, and yet sad; what we should call stark, staring mad.
all down his back, his tangled hair flowed wild, unkempt; his head was
bare; a leopard's skin was o'er him flung; around his neck huge beads
were hung, and in his hand-ah! there's the rub- he carried a portentous
club.  after visiting the dervishes i spend an hour in an adjacent tchai-
khan drinking tea with my escort and treating them to sundry well-deserved
kalians.  among the rabble collected about the doorway is a half-witted
youngster of about ten or twelve summers with a suit of clothes consisting
of a waist string and a piece of rag about the size of an ordinary pen-
wiper.  he is the unfortunate possessor of a stomach disproportionately
large and which intrudes itself upon other people's notice like a prize
pumpkin at an agricultural fair.  this youth's chief occupation appears
to be feeding melon-rinds to a pet sheep belonging to the tchai-khan and
playing a resonant tattoo on his abnormally obtrusive paunch with the
palms of his hands.  this produces a hollow, echoing sound like striking
an inflated bladder with a stuffed club; and considering that the youth
also introduces a novel and peculiar squint into the performance, it is
a remarkably edifying spectacle.  supper-time coming round, the soldiers
show the way to an eating place, where we sup off delicious bazaar-kabobs,
one of the most tasteful preparations of mutton one could well imagine.
the mutton is minced to the consistency of paste and properly seasoned;
it is then spread over flat iron skewers and grilled over a glowing
charcoal fire; when nicely browned they are laid on a broad pliable sheet
of bread in lieu of a plate, and the skewers withdrawn, leaving before
the customer a dozen long flat fingers of nicely browned kabobs reposing
side by side on the cake of wheaten bread-a most appetizing and digestible
dish.  returning to the caravanserai, i dismiss my faithful soldiers with
a suitable present, for which they loudly implore the blessings of allah
on my head, and for the third or fourth time impress upon the caravanseraijes
the necessity of making my comfort for the night his special consideration.
they fill that humble individual's mind with grandiloquent ideas of my
personal importance by dwelling impressively on the circumstance of my
having eaten with the governor, a fact they likewise have lost no
opportunity of heralding throughout the bazaar during the afternoon.  the
caravanserai-jee spreads quilts and a pillow for me on the open bala-khana,
and i at once prepare for sleep.  a gentle-eyed and youthful seyud wearing
an enormous white turban and a flowing gown glides up to my couch and
begins plying me with questions.  the soldiers noticing this as they are
about leaving the court-yard favor him with a torrent of imprecations
for venturing to disturb my repose; a score of others yell fiercely at
him in emulation of the soldiers, causing the dreamy-eyed youth to hastily
scuttle away again.  nothing is now to be heard all around but the evening
prayers of the caravanserai guests; listening to the multitudinous cries
of allah-il-allah around me, i fall asleep.  about midnight i happen to
wake again; everything is quiet, the stars are shining brightly down
into the court-yard, and a small grease lamp is flickering on the floor
near my head, placed there by the caravan-serai-jee after i had fallen
asleep.  the past day has been one full of interesting experiences; from
the time of leaving the garden of mohammed ali khan this morning in
company with the moonshi bashi, until lulled to sleep three hours ago
by the deep-voiced prayers of fanatical mohammedans the day has proved
a series of surprises, and i seem more than ever before to have been the
sport and plaything of fortune; however, if the fickle goddess never
used anybody worse than she has used me to-day there would be little
cause for complaining.

as though to belie their general reputation of sanctimoniousness, a tall,
stately seyud voluntarily poses as my guide and protector en route through
the awakening bazaar toward the tabreez gate next morning, cuffing
obtrusive youngsters right and left, and chiding grown-up people whenever
their inordinate curiosity appeals to him as being aggressive and impolite;
one can only account for this strange condescension on the part of this
holy man by attributing it to the marvellous civilizing and levelling
influence of the bicycle.  arriving outside the gate, the crowd of followers
are well repaid for their trouble by watching my progress for a couple
of miles down a broad straight roadway admirably kept and shaded with
thrifty chenars or plane-trees.  wheeling down this pleasant avenue i
encounter mule-trains, the animals festooned with strings of merrily
jingling bells, and camels gayly caparisoned, with huge, nodding tassels
on their heads and pack-saddles, and deep-toned bells of sheet iron
swinging at their throats and sides; likewise the omnipresent donkey
heavily laden with all manner of village produce for the khoi market.
my road after leaving the avenue winds around the end of projecting
hills, and for a dozen miles traverses a gravelly plain that ascends
with a scarcely perceptible gradient to the summit of a ridge; it then
descends by a precipitous trail into the valley of lake ooroomiah.
following along the northern shore of the lake i find fairly level roads,
but nothing approaching continuous wheeling, owing to wash-outs and small
streams leading from a range of mountains near by to the left, between
which and the briny waters of the lake my route leads.  lake ooroomiah
is somewhere near the size of salt lake, utah, and its waters are so
heavily impregnated with saline matter that one can lie down on the
surface and indulge in a quiet, comfortable snooze; at least, this is
what i am told by a missionary at tabreez who says he has tried it
himself; and even allowing for the fact that missionaries are but human
after all and this gentleman hails originally from somewhere out west,
there is no reason for supposing the statement at all exaggerated.  had
i heard of this beforehand i should certainly have gone far enough out
of my course to try the experiment of being literally rocked on the
cradle of the deep.  near midday i make a short circuit to the north, to
investigate the edible possibilities of a village nestling in a cul-de-sac
of the mountain foot-hills.  the resident khan turns out to be a regular
jovial blade, sadly partial to the flowing bowl.  when i arrive he is
perseveringly working himself up to the proper pitch of booziness for
enjoying his noontide repast by means of copious potations of arrack;
he introduces himself as hassan khan, offers me arrack, and cordially
invites me to dine with him.  after dinner, when examining my revolver,
map, etc., the khan greatly admires a photograph of myself as a peculiar
proof of ferenghi skill in producing a person's physiognomy, and blandly
asks me to "make him one of himself," doubtless thinking that a person
capable of riding on a wheel is likewise possessed of miraculous all
'round abilities.

the khan consumes not less than a pint of raw arrack during the dinner
hour, and, not unnaturally, finds himself at the end a trifle funny and
venturesome.  when preparing to take my departure he proposes that i give
him a ride on the bicycle; nothing loath to humor him a little in return
for his hospitality, i assist him to mount, and wheel him around for a
few minutes, to the unconcealed delight of the whole population, who
gather about to see the astonishing spectacle of their khan riding on
the ferenghi's wonderful asp-i-awhan.  the khan being short and pudgy is
unable to reach the pedals, and the confidence-inspiring fumes of arrack
lead him to announce to the assembled villagers that if his legs were
only a little longer he could certainly go it alone, a statement that
evidently fills the simple-minded ryots with admiration for the khan's
alleged newly-discovered abilities.

the road continues level but somewhat loose and sandy; the scenery around
becomes strikingly beautiful, calling up thoughts of "arabian nights "
entertainments, and the genii and troubadours of persian song.  the bright,
blue waters of lake ooroomiah stretch away southward to where the dim
outlines of mountains, a hundred miles away, mark the southern shore;
rocky islets at a lesser distance, and consequently more pronounced in
character and contour, rear their jagged and picturesque forms sheer
from the azure surface of the liquid mirror, the face of which is unruffled
by a single ripple and unspecked by a single animate or inanimate object;
the beach is thickly incrusted with salt, white and glistening in the
sunshine; the shore land is mingled sand and clay of a deep-red color,
thus presenting the striking and beautiful phenomena of a lake shore
painted red, white, and blue by the inimitable hand of nature.  a range
of rugged gray mountains run parallel with the shore but a few miles
away; crystal streams come bubbling lake-ward over pebble-bedded channels
from sources high up the mountain slopes; villages, hidden amid groves
of spreading jujubes and graceful chenars, nestle here and there in the
rocky gateways of ravines; orchards and vineyards are scattered about
the plain.  they are imprisoned within gloomy mud walls, but, like living
creatures struggling for their liberty, the fruit-laden branches extend
beyond their prison-walls, and the graceful tendrils of the vines find
their way through the sun-cracks and fissures of decay, and trail over
the top as though trying to cover with nature's charitable veil the
unsightly works of man; and all is arched over with the cloudless persian
sky.

beaming the roads of this picturesque region in search of victims is a
most persistent and pugnacious species of fly; rollicking as the blue-
bottle, and the veritable double of the green-head horsefly of the western
prairies, he combines the dash and impetuosity of the one with the
ferocity and persistency of the other; but he is happily possessed of
one redeeming feature not possessed by either of the above-mentioned and
well-known insects of the western world.  when either of these settles
himself affectionately on the end of a person's nose, and the person,
smarting under the indignity, hits himself viciously on that helpless
and unoffending portion of his person, as a general thing it doesn't
hurt the fly, simply because the fly doesn't wait long enough to be hurt;
but the lake ooroomiah fly is a comparatively guileless insect, and
quietly remains where he alights until it suits one's convenience to
forcibly remove him; for this redeeming quality i bespeak for him the
warmest encomiums of fly-harassed humans everywhere.  dusk is settling
down over the broad expanse of lake, plain, and mountain when i encounter
a number of villagers taking donkey-loads of fruit and almonds from an
orchard to their village.  they cordially invite me to accompany them and
accept their hospitality for the night.  they are travelling toward a
large area of walled orchards but a short distance to the north, and i
naturally expect to find their village located among them; so, not knowing
how far ahead the next village may be, i gladly accept their kindly
invitation, and follow along behind.  it gets dusky, then duskier, then
dark; the stars come peeping out thicker and thicker, and still i am
trundling with these people slowly along up the dry and stone-strewn
channel of spring-time freshets, expecting every minute to reach their
village, only to be as often disappointed, for over an hour, during which
we travel out of my proper course perhaps four miles.  finally, after
crossing several little streams, or rather; one stream several times,
we arrive at our destination, and i am installed, as the guest of a
leading villager, beneath a sort of open porch attached to the house.
here, as usual, i quickly become the centre of attraction for a wondering
and admiring audience of half-naked villagers.  the villager whose guest
i become brings forth bread and cheese, some bring me grapes, others
newly gathered almonds, and then they squat around in the dim religious
light of primitive grease-lamps and watch me feed, with the same wondering
interest and the same unconcealed delight with which youthful londoners
at the zoological gardens regard a pet monkey devouring their offerings
of nuts and ginger-snaps.  i scarcely know what to make of these particular
villagers; they seem strangely childlike and unsophisticated, and moreover,
perfectly delighted at my unexpected presence in their midst.  it is
doubtful whether their unimportant little village among the foothills
was ever before visited by a ferenghi; consequently i am to them a rara
avis to be petted and admired.  i am inclined to think them a village of
yezeeds or devilworshippers; the yezeeds believe that allah, being by
nature kind and merciful, would not injure anybody under any circumstances,
consequently there is nothing to be gained by worshipping him.  sheitan
(satan), on the contrary, has both the power and the inclination to do
people harm, therefore they think it politic to cultivate his good-will
and to pursue a policy of conciliation toward him by worshipping him and
revering his name.  thus they treat the name of satan with even greater
reverence than christians and mohammedans treat the name of god.  independent
of their hospitable treatment of myself, these villagers seem but little
advanced in their personal habits above mere animals; the women are half-
naked, and seem possessed of little more sense of shame than our original
ancestors before the fall.  there is great talk of kardash among them in
reference to myself.  they are advocating hospitality of a nature altogether
too profound for the consideration of a modest and discriminating ferenghi -
hospitable intentions that i deem it advisable to dissipate at once by
affecting deep, dense ignorance of what they are discussing.

in the morning they search the village over to find the wherewithal to
prepare me some tea before my departure.  eight miles from the village i
discover that four miles forward yesterday evening, instead of backward,
would have brought me to a village containing a caravanserai.  i naturally
feel a trifle chagrined at the mistake of having journeyed eight unnecessary
miles, but am, perhaps, amply repaid by learning something of the utter
simplicity of the villagers before their character becomes influenced
by intercourse with more enlightened people.

my course now leads over a stony plain.  the wheeling is reasonably
good, and i gradually draw away from the shore of lake ooroomiah.  melon-
gardens and vineyards are frequently found here and there across the
plain; the only entrance to the garden is a hole about three feet by
four in the high mud wall, and this is closed by a wooden door; an arm-
hole is generally found in the wall to enable the owner to reach the
fastening from the outside.  investigating one of these fastenings at a
certain vineyard i discover a lock so primitive that it must have been
invented by prehistoric man.  a flat, wooden bar or bolt is drawn into a
mortise-like receptacle of the wall, open at the top; the man then daubs
a handful of wet clay over it; in a few minutes the clay hardens and the
door is fast.  this is not a burglar-proof lock, certainly, and is only
depended upon for a fastening during the temporary absence of the owner
in the day-time.  during the summer the owner and family not infrequently
live in the garden altogether.  during the forenoon the bicycle is the
innocent cause of two people being thrown from the backs of their
respective steeds.  one is a man carelessly sitting sidewise on his donkey;
the meek-eyed jackass suddenly makes a pivot of his hind feet and wheels
round, and the rider's legs as suddenly shoot upward.  he frantically
grips his fiery, untamed steed around the neck as he finds himself over-
balanced, and comes up with a broad grin and an irrepressible chuckle
of merriment over the unwonted spirit displayed by his meek and humble
charger, that probably had never scared at anything before in all its
life.  the other case is unfortunately a lady whose horse literally springs
from beneath her, treating her to a clean tumble.  the poor lady sings
out "allah!" rather snappishly at finding herself on the ground, so
snappishly that it leaves little room for doubt of its being an imprecation;
but her rude, unsympathetic attendants laugh right merrily at seeing her
floundering about in the sand; fortunately, she is uninjured.  although
turkish and persian ladies ride a la amazon, a position that is popularly
supposed to be several times more secure than side-saddles, it is a
noticeable fact that they seem perfectly helpless, and come to grief the
moment their steed shies at anything or commences capering about with
anything like violence.

on a portion of road that is unridable from sand i am captured by a
rowdyish company of donkey-drivers, returning with empty fruit-baskets
from tabreez.  they will not be convinced that the road is unsuitable,
and absolutely refuse to let me go without seeing the bicycle ridden.
after detaining me until patience on my part ceases to be a virtue, and
apparently as determined for their purpose as ever, i am finally compelled
to produce the convincing argument with five chambers and rifled barrel.
these crowds of donkey-men seem inclined to be rather lawless, and
scarcely a day passes lately but what this same eloquent argument has
to be advanced in the interest of individual liberty.  fortunately the
mere sight of a revolver in the hands of a ferenghi has the magical
effect of transforming the roughest and most overbearing gang of ryots
into peaceful, retiring citizens.  the plain i am now traversing is a
broad, gray-looking area surrounded by mountains, and stretching away
eastward from lake ooroomiah for seventy-five miles.  it presents the
same peculiar aspect of persian scenery nearly everywhere-a general
verdureless and unproductive country, with the barren surface here and
there relieved by small oases of cultivated fields and orchards.  the
villages being built solely of mud, and consequently of the same color
as the general surface, are undistinguishable from a distance, unless
rendered conspicuous by trees.  laboring under a slightly mistaken
impression concerning the distance to tabreez, i push ahead in the
expectation of reaching there to-night; the plain becomes more generally
cultivated; the caravan routes from different directions come to a focus
on broad trails leading into the largest city in persia, and which is
the great centre of distribution for european goods arriving by caravan
to trebizond.  coming to a large, scattering village, some time in the
afternoon, i trundle leisurely through the lanes inclosed between lofty
and unsightly mud walls thinking i have reached the suburbs of tabreez;
finding my mistake upon emerging on the open plain again, i am yet again
deceived by another spreading village, and about six o'clock find myself
wheeling eastward across an uncultivated stretch of uncertain dimensions.
the broad caravan trail is worn by the traffic of centuries considerably
below the level of the general surface, and consists of a number of
narrow, parallel trails, along which swarms of donkeys laden with produce
from tributary villages daily plod, besides the mule and camel caravans
from a greater distance.  these narrow beaten paths afford excellent
wheeling, and i bowl along quite briskly.  as one approaches tabreez, the
country is found traversed by an intricate network of irrigating ditches,
some of them works of considerable magnitude; the embankments on either
side of the road are frequently high enough to obscure a horseman.  these
works are almost as old as the hills themselves, for the cultivation of
the tabreez plain has remained practically an unchanged system for three
thousand years, as though, like the ancient laws of the medes and persians,
it also were made unchangeable.

about dusk i fall in with another riotous crowd of homeward-bound fruit
carriers, who, not satisfied at seeing me ride past, want to stop me;
one of them rushes up behind, grabs my package attached to the rear
baggage-carrier, and nearly causes an overthrow; frightening him off, i
spurt ahead, barely escaping two or three donkey cudgels hurled at me
in pure wantonness, born of the courage inspired by a majority of twenty
to one.  there is no remedy for these unpleasant occurrences except
travelling under escort, and the avoiding serious trouble or accident
becomes a matter for every-day congratulation.  at eighteen miles from
the last village it becomes too dark to remain in the saddle without
danger of headers, and a short trundle brings me, not to tabreez even
now, but to another village eight miles nearer.  here there is a large
caravanserai.  near the entrance is a hole-in-the-wall sort of a shop
wherein i espy a man presiding over a tempting assortment of cantaloupes,
grapes, and pears.  the whirligig of fortune has favored me today with
tea, blotting-paper ekmek, and grapes for breakfast; later on two small
watermelons, and at 2 p.m. blotting-paper
ekmek and an infinitesimal quantity of yaort (now called mast).  it is
unnecessary to add that i arrive in this village with an appetite that
will countenance no unnecessary delay.  two splendid ripe cantaloupes,
several fine bunches of grapes, and some pears are devoured immediately,
with a reckless disregard of consequences, justifiable only on the grounds
of semi-starvation and a temporary barbarism born of surrounding
circumstances.  after this savage attack on the maivah-jee's stock, i
learn that the village contains a small tchai-khan; repairing thither i
stretch myself on the divan for an hour's repose, and afterward partake
of tea, bread, and peaches.  at bed-time the khan-jee makes me up a couch
on the divan, locks the door
inside, blows out the light, and then, afraid to occupy the same building
with such a dangerous-looking individual as myself, climbs to the roof
through a hole in the wall.  eager villagers carry both myself and wheel
across a bridge-less stream upon resuming my journey to tabreez next
morning; the road is level and ridable, though a trifle deep with dust
and sand, and in an hour i am threading the suburban lanes of the city.
along these eight miles i certainly pass not less than five hundred pack-
donkeys en route to the tabreez market with everything, from baskets of
the choicest fruit in the world to huge bundles of prickly camel-thorn
and sacks of tezek for fuel.  no animals in all the world, i should think,
stand in more urgent need of the kindly offices of the society for the
prevention of cruelty to animals than the thousands of miserable donkeys
engaged in supplying tabreez with fuel; their brutal drivers seem utterly
callous and indifferent to the pitiful sufferings of these patient
toilers.  numbers of instances are observed this morning where the rough,
ill-fitting breech-straps and ropes have literally seesawed their way
through the skin and deep into the flesh, and are still rasping deeper
and deeper every day, no attempt whatever being made to remedy this evil;
on the contrary, their pitiless drivers urge them on by prodding the raw
sores with sharpened sticks, and by belaboring them unceasingly with an
instrument of torture in the shape of whips with six inches of ordinary
trace-chain for a lash.  as if the noble army of persian donkey drivers
were not satisfied with the refinement of physical cruelty to which they
have attained, they add insult to injury by talking constantly to their
donkeys while driving them along, and accusing them of all the crimes
in the calendar and of every kind of disreputable action.  fancy the
bitter sense of humiliation that must overcome the proud, haughty spirit
of a mouse-colored jackass at being prodded in an open wound with a sharp
stick and hearing himself at the same time thus insultingly addressed:
"oh, thou son of a burnt father and murderer of thine own mother, would
that i myself had died rather than my father should have lived to see
me drive such a brute as thou art." yet this sort of talk is habitually
indulged in by the barbarous drivers.  while young, the donkeys' nostrils
are slit open clear up to the bridge-bone; this is popularly supposed
among the persians to be an improvement upon nature in that it gives
them greater freedom of respiration.  instead of the well known clucking
sound used among ourselves as a persuasive, the persian makes a sound
not unlike the bleating of a sheep; a stranger, being within hearing and
out of sight of a gang of donkey drivers in a hurry to reach their
destination, would be more likely to imagine himself in the vicinity of
a flock of sheep than anything else.  as is usually the case, a volunteer
guide bobs serenely up immediately i enter the city, and i follow
confidently along, thinking he is piloting me to the english consulate,
as i have requested; instead of this he steers me into the custom-house
and turns me over to the officials.  these worthy gentlemen, after asking
me to ride around the custom-house yard, pretend to become altogether
mystified about what they ought to do with the bicycle, and in the absence
of any precedent to govern themselves by, finally conclude among themselves
that the proper thing would be to confiscate it.  obtaining a guide to
show me to the residence of mr. abbott, the english consul-general, that
energetic representative of her majesty's government smiles audibly at
the thoughts of their mystification, and then writes them a letter couched
in terms of humorous reproachfulness, asking them what in the name of
allah and the prophet they mean by confiscating a traveller's horse, his
carriage, his camel, his everything on legs and wheels consolidated into
the beautiful vehicle with which he is journeying to teheran to see the
shah, and all around the world to see everybody and everything? - ending
by telling them that he never in all his consular experiences heard of
a proceeding so utterly atrocious.  he sends the letter by the consulate
dragoman, who accompanies me back to the custom-house.  the officers at
once see and acknowledge their mistake; but meanwhile they have been
examining the bicycle, and some of them appear to have fallen violently
in love with it; they yield it up, but it is with apparent reluctance,
and one of the leading officials takes me into the stable, and showing
me several splendid horses begs me to take my choice from among them and
leave the bicycle behind.

mr. and mrs. abbott cordially invite me to become their guest while
staying at tabreez.  to-day is thursday, and although my original purpose
was only to remain here a couple of days, the innovation from roughing
it on the road, to roast duck for dinner, and breakfast in one's own
room of a morning, coupled with warnings against travelling on the sabbath
and invitations to dinner from the american missionaries, proves a
sufficient inducement for me to conclude to stay till monday, satisfied
at the prospect of reaching teheran in good season.  it is now something
less than four hundred miles to teheran, with the assurance of better
roads than i have yet had in persia, for the greater portion of the
distance; besides this, the route is now a regular post route with chapar-
khanas (post-houses) at distances of four to five farsakhs apart.  on
friday night tabreez experienced two slight shocks of an earthquake, and
in the morning mr. abbott points out several fissures in the masonry of
the consulate, caused by previous visitations of the same undesirable
nature; the earthquakes here seem to resemble the earthquakes of california
in that they come reasonably mild and often.  the place likewise awakens
memories of the golden state in another and more appreciative particular
nowhere, save perhaps in california, does one find such delicious
grapes, peaches, and pears as at ancient taurus, a specialty for which
it has been justly celebrated from time immemorial.  on saturday i take
dinner with mr. oldfather, one of the missionaries, and in the evening
we all pay a visit to mr. whipple and family, the consulate link-boy
lighting the way before us with a huge cylindrical lantern of transparent
oiled muslin called a farnooze.  these lanterns are always carried after
night before people of wealth or social consequence, varying in size
according to the person's idea of their own social importance.  the size
of the farmooze is supposed to be an index of the social position of the
person or family, so that one can judge something of what sort of people
are coming down the street, even on the darkest night, whenever the
attendant link-boy heaves in sight with the farnooze.  some of these
social indicators are the size of a portland cement barrel, even in
persia; it is rather a smile-provoking thought to think what tremendous
farnoozes would be seen lighting up the streets on gloomy evenings, were
this same custom prevalent among ourselves; few of us but what could
call to memory people whose farnoozes would be little smaller than brewery
mash-tubs, and which would have to be carried between six-foot link-boys
on a pole.  ameer-i-nazan, the valiat or heir apparent to the throne, and
at present nominal governor of tabreez, has seen a tricycle in teheran,
one having been imported some time ago by an english gentleman in the
shah's service; but the fame of the bicycle excites his curiosity and
he sends an officer around to the consulate to examine and report upon
the difference between bicycle and tricycle, and also to discover and
explain the modus operandi of maintaining one's balance on two wheels.
the officer returns with the report that my machine won't even stand up,
without somebody holding it, and that nobody but a ferenghi who is in
league with sheitan, could possibly hope to ride it.  perhaps it is this
alarming report, and the fear of exciting the prejudices of the mollahs
and fanatics about him, by having anything to do with a person reported
on trustworthy authority to be in league with his satanic majesty, that
prevents the prince from requesting me to ride before him in tabreez;
but i have the pleasure of meeting him at hadji agha on the evening of
the first day out.  mr. whippie kindly makes out an itinerary of the
villages and chapar-khanas i shall pass on the journey to teheran; the
superintendent of the tabreez station of the indo-european telegraph
company voluntarily telegraphs to the agents at miana and zendjan when
to expect rne, and also to teheran; mrs. abbott fills my coat pockets
with roast chicken, and thus equipped and prepared, at nine o'clock on
monday morning i am ready for the home-stretch of the season, before
going into winter quarters.

the turkish consul-general, a corpulent gentleman whose avoirdupois i
mentally jot down at four hundred pounds, comes around with several
others to see me take a farewell spin on the bricked pavements of the
consulate garden.  like all persons of four hundred pounds weight, the
effendi is a good-natured, jocose individual, and causes no end of
merriment by pretending to be anxious to take a spin on the bicycle
himself, whereas it requires no inconsiderable exertion on his part to
waddle from his own residence hard by into the consulate.  three soldiers
are detailed from the consulate staff to escort me through the city; en
route through the streets the pressure of the rabble forces one unlucky
individual into one of the dangerous narrow holes that abound in the
streets, up to his neck; the crowd yell with delight at seeing him tumble
in, and nobody stops to render him any assistance or to ascertain whether
he is seriously hurt.  soon a poor old ryot on a donkey, happens amid
the confusion to cross immediately in front of the bicycle; whack! whack!
whack! come the ready staves of the zealous and vigilant soldiers across
the shoulders of the offender; the crowd howls with renewed delight at
this, and several hilarious hobble-de-hoys endeavor to shove one of their
companions in the place vacated by the belabored ryot, in the hope that
he likewise will come in for the visitation of the soldiers' o'er- willing
staves.  the broad suburban road, where the people have been fondly
expecting to see the bicycle light out in earnest for teheran at a
marvellous rate of speed, is found to be nothing less than a bed of loose
sand and stones, churned up by the narrow hoofs of multitudinous donkeys.
quite a number of better class persians accompany me some distance further
on horseback; when taking their departure, a gentleman on a splendid
arab charger, shakes hands and says: "good-by, my dear," which apparently
is all the english he knows.  he has evidently kept his eyes and ears
open when happening about the english consulate, and the happy thought
striking him at the moment, he repeats, parrot-like, this term of
endearment, all unsuspicious of the ridiculousness of its application
in the present case.

for several miles the road winds tortuously over a range of low, stony
hills, the surface being generally loose and unridable.  the water-supply
of tabreez is conducted from these hills by an ancient system of kanaats
or underground water-ditches; occasionally one comes to a sloping cavern
leading down to the water; on descending to the depth of from twenty to
forty feet, a small, rapidly-coursing stream of delicious cold water is
found, well rewarding the thirsty traveller for his trouble; sometimes
these cavernous openings are simply sloping, bricked archways, provided
with steps.  the course of these subterranean water-ways can always be
traced their entire length by uniform mounds of earth, piled up at short
intervals on the surface; each mound represents the excavations from a
perpendicular shaft, at the bottom of which the crystal water can be
seen coursing along toward the city; they are merely man-holes for the
purpose of readily cleaning out the channel of the kanaat.  the water is
conducted underground, chiefly to avoid the waste by evaporation and
absorption in surface ditches.  these kanaats are very extensive affairs
in many places; the long rows of surface mounds are visible, stretching
for mile after mile across the plain as far as eye can penetrate, or
until losing themselves among the foot-hills of some distant mountain
chain; they were excavated in the palmy days of the persian empire to
bring pure mountain streams to the city fountains and to irrigate the
thirsty plain; it is in the interest of self-preservation that the
persians now keep them from falling into decay.  at noon, while seated
on a grassy knoll discussing the before-mentioned contents of my pockets,
i am favored with a free exhibition of what a physical misunderstanding
is like among the persian ryots.  two companies of katir-jees happen to
get into an altercation about something, and from words it gradually
develops into blows; not blows of the fist, for they know nothing of
fisticuffs, but they belabor each other vigorously with their long, thick
donkey persuaders, sticks that are anything but small and willowy; it
is an amusing spectacle, and seated on the commanding knoll nibbling
"drum-sticks" and wish-bones, i can almost fancy myself a roman of old,
eating peanuts and watching a gladiatorial contest in the amphitheatre.
the similitude, however, is not at all striking, for thick as are their
quarter-staffs the persian ryots don't punish each other very severely.
whenever one of them works himself up to a fighting-pitch, he commences
belaboring one of the others on the back, apparently always striking so
that the blow produces a maximum of noise with a minimum of punishment;
the person thus attacked never ventures to strike back, but retreats
under the blows until his assailant's rage becomes spent and he desists.
meanwhile the war of words goes merrily forward; perchance in a few
minutes the person recently attacked suddenly becomes possessed of a
certain amount of rage-inspired courage, and he in turn commences a
vigorous assault upon somebody, probably his late assailant; this worthy,
having become a little cooler, has mysteriously lost his late pugnacity,
and now likewise retreats without once attempting to raise his own stick
in self-defence.  the lower and commercial class persians are pretty
quarrelsome among themselves, but they quarrel chiefly with their tongues;
when they fight without sticks it is an ear-pulling, clothes-tugging,
wrestling sort of a scuffle, which continues without greater injury than
a torn garment until they become exhausted if pretty evenly matched, or
until separated by bystanders; they never, never hurt each other unless
they are intoxicated, when they sometimes use their short swords; there
is no intoxication, except in private drinking-parties.






chapter xx.




tabreez to teheran.

the wheeling improves in the afternoon, and alongside my road runs a bit
of civilization in the shape of the splendid iron poles of the indo-european
telegraph company.  half a dozen times this afternoon i become the imaginary
enemy of a couple of cavalrymen travelling in the same direction as
myself; they swoop down upon me from the rear at a charging gallop,
valiantly whooping and brandishing their martini-henrys; when they arrive
within a few yards of my rear wheel they swerve off on either side and
rein their fiery chargers up, allowing me to forge ahead; they amuse
themselves by repeating this interesting performance over and over again.
being usually a good rider, the dash and courage of the persian cavalryman
is something extraordinary in time of peace; no more brilliant and
intrepid cavalry charge on a small scale could be well imagined than i
have witnessed several times this afternoon.  but upon the outbreak of
serious hostilities the average warrior in the shah's service suddenly
becomes filled with a wild, pathetic yearning after the peaceful and
honorable calling of a katir-jee, an uncontrollable desire to become a
humble, contented tiller of the soil, or handy-man about a tchaikhan,
anything, in fact, of a strictly peaceful character.  were i a hostile
trooper with a red jacket, and a general warlike appearance, and the
bicycle a machine gun, though our whooping, charging cavalrymen were
twenty instead of two, they would only charge once, and that would be
with their horses' crimson-dyed tails streaming in the breeze toward me.
the shah's soldiers are gentle, unwarlike creatures at heart; there are
probably no soldiers in the whole world that would acquit themselves
less creditably in a pitched battle; they are, nevertheless, not without
certain soldierly qualities, well adapted to their country; the cavalrymen
are very good riders, and although the infantry does not present a very
encouraging appearance on the parade-ground, they would meander across
five hundred miles of country on half rations of blotting-paper ekmek
without any vigorous remonstrance, and wait uncomplainingly for their
pay until the middle of next year.  about five o'clock i arrive at hadji
agha, a large village forty miles from tabreez; here, as soon as it is
ascertained that i intend remaining over night, i am actually beset by
rival khan-jees, who commence jabbering and gesticulating about the
merits of their respective establishments, like hotel-runners in the
united states; of course they are several degrees less rude and boisterous,
and more considerate of one's personal inclinations than their prototypes
in america, but they furnish yet another proof that there is nothing new
under the sun.  hadji agha is a village of seyuds, or descendants of the
prophet, these and the mollahs being the most bigoted class in persia;
when i drop into the tchai-khan for a glass or two of tea, the sanctimonious
old joker with henna-tinted beard and finger-nails, presiding over the
samovar, rolls up his eyes in holy horror at the thoughts of waiting
upon an unhallowed ferenghi, and it requires considerable pressure from
the younger and less fanatical men to overcome his disinclination; he
probably breaks the glass i drank from after my departure.

about dusk the valiat and his courtiers arrive on horseback from tabreez;
the prince immediately seeks my quarters at the khan, and, after examining
the bicycle, wants me to take it out and ride; it is getting rather dark,
however, so i put him off till morning; he remains and smokes cigarettes
with me for half an hour, and then retires to the residence of the local
khan for the night.  the prince seems an amiable, easy-going sort of a
person; while in my company his countenance is wreathed in a pleasant
smile continually, and i fancy he habitually wears that same expression.
his youthful courtiers seem frivolous young bloods, putting in most of
the half-hour in showing me their accomplishments in the way of making
floating rings of their cigarette smoke.  later in the evening i stroll
around to the tchai-khan again; it is the gossiping-place of the village,
and i find our sanctimonious seyuds indulging in uncomplimentary comments
regarding the yaliat's conduct in hobnobbing with the ferenghi; how
bigoted these persians are, and yet how utterly destitute of principle
and moral character.  in the morning the prince sends me an invitation
to come and drink tea with them before starting out; he bears the same
perennial smile as yesterday evening.  although he is generally understood
to be completely under the influence of the fanatical and bigoted seyuds
and mollahs, who are strictly opposed to the ferenghi and the fereughi's
ideas of progress and civilization, he seems withal an amiable, well-disposed
young man, whom one could scarce help liking personally, arid feeling
sorry at the troubles in store for him ahead.  he has an elder brother,
the zil-es-sultan, now governor of the southern provinces; but not being
the son of a royal princess, the shah has nominated ameer-i-nazan as his
successor to the throne.  the zil-es-sultan, although of a somewhat cruel
disposition, has proved himself a far more capable and energetic person
than the valiat, and makes no secret of the fact that he intends disputing
the succession with his brother, by force of arms if necessary, at the
shah's demise.  he has, so at least it is currently reported, had his
sword-blade engraved with the grim inscription, "this is for the valiat's
head," and has jocularly notified his inoffensive brother of the fact.
the zil-es-sultau belongs to the party of progress; recks little of the
opinions of priests and fanatics, is fond of englishmen and european
improvements, and keeps a kennel of english bull dogs.  should he become
shah of persia, baron reuter's grand scheme of railways and commercial
regeneration, which was foiled by the fanaticism of the seyuds and mollahs
soon after the shah's visit to england, may yet come to something, and
the railroad rails now rusting in the swamps of the caspian littoral
may, after all, form part of a railway between the seaboard and the
capital.  the road for a short distance east of hadji agha is splendid
wheeling, and the prince and his courtiers accompany me for some two
miles, finding much amusement in racing with me whenever the road permits
of spurting.  the country now develops into undulating upland, uncultivated
and stone-strewn, except where an occasional stream, affording irrigating
facilities, has rendered possible the permanent maintenance of a mud
village and a circumscribed area of wheat-fields, melon-gardens, and
vineyards.  no sooner does one find himself launched upon the comparatively
well-travelled post-route than a difference becomes manifest in the
character of the people.  commercially speaking, the persian is considerably
more of a jew than the jew himself, and along a route frequented by
travellers, the person possessing some little knowledge of the thievish
ways of the country and of current prices, besides having plenty of small
change, finds these advantages a matter for congratulation almost every
hour of the day.  the proprietor of a wretched little mud hovel, solemnly
presiding over a few thin sheets of bread, a jar of rancid, hirsute
butter, and a dozen half-ripe melons, affects a glum, sorrowful expression
to think that he should happen to be without small change, and consequently
obliged to accept the hamsherri's fifty kopec piece for provisions of
one-tenth the value; but the mysterious frequency of this same state of
affairs and accompanying sorrowful expression, taken in connection with
the actual plenitude of small change in persia, awakens suspicions even
in the mind of the most confiding and uninitiated person.  a peculiar
system of commercial mendicancy obtains among the proprietors of melon
and cucumber gardens alongside the road of this particular part of the
country; observing a likely-looking traveller approaching, they come
running to him with a melon or cucumber that they know to be utterly
worthless, and beg the traveller to accept it as a present; delighted,
perhaps with their apparent simple-hearted hospitality, and, moreover,
sufficiently thirsty to appreciate the gift of a melon, the unsuspecting
wayfarer tenders the crafty proprietor of the garden a suitable present
of money in return and accepts the proffered gift; upon cutting it open
he finds the melon unfit for anything, and it gradually dawns upon him
that he has just grown a trifle wiser concerning the inbred cunningness
and utter dishonesty of the persians than he was before.  ere the day is
ended the same game will probably be attempted a dozen times.  in addition
to these artful customers, one occasionally comes across small colonies
of lepers, who, being compelled to isolate themselves from their fellows,
have taken up their abode in rude hovels or caves by the road-side, and
sally forth in all their hideousness to beset the traveller with piteous
cries for assistance.  some of these poor lepers are loathsome in appearance
to the last degree; their scanty coverings of rags and tatters conceals
nothing of the ravages of their dread disease; some sit at the entrance
to their hovels, stretching out their hands and piteously appealing for
alms; others drop down exhausted in the road while endeavoring to run
and overtake the passer-by; there is nothing deceptive about these
wretched outcasts, their condition is only too glaringly apparent.  toward
sundown i arrive at turcomanchai, a large village, where in 1828, was
drawn up the treaty of peace between persia and russia, which transferred
the remaining persian territory of the caucasus into the capacious maw
of the northern bear.  it is currently reported that after depriving the
persians of their rights to the navigation of the caspian sea the czar
coolly gave his amiable friend the shah a practical lesson concerning
the irony of fortune by presenting him with a yacht.  seeking the guidance
of a native to the caravanserai, this quick-witted individual leads the
way through tortuous alleyways to the other end of the village and pilots
me to the camp of a tea caravan, pitched on the outskirts, thinking i
had requested to be guided to a caravan; the caravan men direct me to
the chapar-khana, where accommodations of the usual rude nature are
provided.  sending into the village for eggs, sugar, and tea, the chapar-
khana keeper and stablemen produce a battered samovar, and after frying
my supper, they prepare tea; they are poor, ragged fellows, but they
seem light-hearted and contented; the siren song of the steaming samovar
seems to a waken in their semi-civilized breasts a sympathetic response,
and they fall to singing and making merry over tiny glasses of sweetened
tea quite as naturally as sailors in a seaport groggery, or germans over
a keg of lager.  jolly, happy-go-lucky fellows though they outwardly
appear, they prove no exception, however, to the general run of their
countrymen in the matter of petty dishonesty; although i gave them money
enough to purchase twice the quantity of provisions they brought back,
besides promising them the customary small present before leaving, in
the morning they make a further attempt on my purse under pretence of
purchasing more butter to cook the remainder of the eggs.  these are
trifling matters to discuss, but they serve to show the wide difference
between the character of the peasant classes in persia and turkey.  the
chapar-khana usually consists of a walled enclosure containing stabling
for a large number of horses and quarters for the stablemen and station-
keeper.  the quickest mode of travelling in persia is by chapar, or, in
other words, on horseback, obtaining fresh horses at each chapar-khana.
the country east of turcomanchai consists of rough, uninteresting upland,
with nothing to vary the monotony of the journey, until noon, when after
wheeling five farsakhs i reach the town of miana, celebrated throughout
the shah's dominions for a certain poisonous bug which inhabits the mud
walls of the houses, and is reputed to bite the inhabitants while they
are sleeping.  the bite is said to produce violent and prolonged fever,
and to be even, dangerous to life.  it is customary to warn travellers
against remaining over night at miana, and, of course, i have not by any
means been forgotten.  like most of these alleged dreadful things, it is
found upon close investigation to be a big bogey with just sufficient
truthfulness about it to play upon the imaginative minds of the people.
the "miana bug-bear" would, i think, be a more appropriate name than
miana bug.  the people here seem inclined to be rather rowdyish in their
reception of a ferenghi without an escort.  while trundling through the
bazaar toward the telegraph station i become the unhappy target for
covertly thrown melon-rinds and other unwelcome missiles, for which there
appears no remedy except the friendly shelter of the station.  this is
just outside the town, and before the gate is reached, stones are exchanged
for melon-rinds, but fortunately without any serious damage being done.
mr. f--, a young german operator, has charge of the control-station here,
and welcomes me most cordially to share his comfortable quarters, urging
me to remain with him several days.  i gladly accept his hospitality till
tomorrow morning.  mr. f-- has a brother who has recently become a
mussulman, and married a couple of persian wives; he is also residing
temporarily at miana.  he soon comes around to the telegraph station,
and turns out to be a wild harum-skarum sort of a person, who regards
his transformation into a mussulman and the setting up of a harem of his
own as anything but a serious affair.  as a reward for embracing the
mohammedan religion and becoming a persian subject the shah has given
him a sum of money and a position in the tabreez mint, besides bestowing
upon him the sounding title of mirza ab-dul karim khan.  it seems that
inducements of a like substantial nature are held out to any ferenghi
of known respectability who formally embraces the shiite branch of the
mohammedan religion, and becomes a persian subject - a rare chance for
chronic ne'er-do-wells among ourselves, one would think.

this novel and festive convert to islam readily gives me a mental peep
behind the scenes of persian domestic life, and would unhesitatingly
have granted me a peep in person had such a thing been possible.  imagine
the ordinary costume of an opera-bouffe artist, shorn of all regard for
the difference between real indecency and the suggestiveness of indelicacy
permissible behind the footlights, and we have the every-day costume of
the persian harem.  in the dreamy eventide the lord of the harem usually
betakes himself to that characteristic institution of the east and
proceeds to drive dull care away by smoking the kalian and watching an
exhibition of the terpsichorean talent of his wives or slaves.  this does
not consist of dancing, such as we are accustomed to understand the art,
but of graceful posturing and bodily contortions, spinning round like a
coryphee, with hand aloft, and snapping their fingers or clashing tiny
brass cymbals; standing with feet motionless and wriggling the joints,
or bending backward until their loose, flowing tresses touch the ground.
persians able to afford the luxury have their womens' apartment walled
with mirrors, placed at appropriate angles, so that when enjoying these
exhibitions of his wives' abilities he finds himself not merely in the
presence of three or six wives, as the case may be, but surrounded on
all sides by scores of airy-fairy nymphs, and amid the dreamy fumes and
soothing bubble-bubbling of his kalian can imagine himself the happy - or
one would naturally think, unhappy - possessor of a hundred.  the effect
of this mirror-work arrangement can be better imagined than described.

"you haven't got one of those mirrored rooms, have you?" i inquire,
beginning to get a trifle inquisitive, and perhaps rather impertinent.
"you couldn't manage to smuggle a fellow inside, disguised as a seyud
or--" "nicht," replies mirza abdul kaiim khan, laughing, "i have not
bothered about a mirror chamber yet, because i only remain here for
another month; but if you happen to come to tabreez any time after i get
settled down there, look me up, and i'll-hello! here comes prince
assabdulla to see your velocipede!" fatteh - ali shah, the grandfather of
the present monarch, had some seventy-two sons, besides no lack of
daughters.  as the son of a prince inherits his father's title in persia,
the numerous descendants of fatteh-ali shah are scattered all over the
empire, and royal princes bob serenely up in every town of any consequence
in the country.  they are frequently found occupying some snug, but not
always lucrative, post under the government.  prince assabdulla has learned
telegraphy, and has charge of the government control-station here, drawing
a salary considerably less than the agent of the english company's line.
the persian government telegraph line consists of one wire strung on
tumble-down wooden poles.  it is erected alongside the splendid english
line of triple wires and substantial iron poles, and the control-stations
are built adjacent to the english stations, as though the persians were
rather timid about their own abilities as telegraphists, and preferred
to nestle, as it were, under the protecting shadow of the english line.
prince assabdulla has an elder brother who is governor of miana, and who
comes around to see the bicycle during the afternoon; they both seem
pleasant and agreeable fellows.  "when the heat of the day has given place
to cooler eventide, and the moon comes peeping over the lofty koflan
koo mountains, near-by to the eastward, we proceed to a large fruit-garden
on the outskirts of the town, and, sitting on the roof of a building,
indulge in luscious purple grapes as large as walnuts, and pears that
melt away in the mouth.  mirza abdul karim khan plays a german accordeon,
and prince assabdulla sings a persian love-song; the leafy branches of
poplar groves are whispering in response to a gentle breeze, and playing
hide-and-seek across the golden face of the moon, and the mountains have
assumed a shadowy, indistinct appearance.  it is a scene of transcendental
loveliness, characteristic of a persian moonlight night.

afterward we repair to mirza abdul kiirim khan's house to smoke the
kalian and drink tea.  his favorite wife, whom he has taught to respond
to the purely frangistan name of " eosie," replenishes and lights the
kalian-giving it a few preliminary puffs herself by way of getting it
under headway before handing it to her husband-and then serves us with
glasses of sweetened tea from the samovar.  in deference to her ferenghi
brother-in-law and myself, eosie has donned a gauzy shroud over the
above-mentioned in-door costume of the persian female.  "she is a beautiful
dancer," says her husband, admiringly, "i wish it were possible for you
to see her dance this evening; bat it isn't; eosie herself wouldn't mind,
but it would be pretty certain to leak out, and miana being a rather
fanatical place, my life wouldn't be worth that much," and the khan
carelessly snapped his fingers.  supper is brought up to the telegraph
station.  prince assabdulla is invited, and comes round with his servant
bearing a number of cucumbers and a bottle of arrack; the prince, being
a genuine mohammedan, is forbidden by his religion to indulge; consequently
he consumes the fiery arrack in preference to some light and harmless
native wine; such is the perversity of human nature.

two princes and a khan are cantering (not khan-tering) alongside the
bicycle as i pull out eastward from miana.  they accompany me to the foot-
hills approaching the koflan koo pass, and wishing me a pleasant journey,
turn their horses' heads homeward again.  reaching the pass proper, i
find it to be an exceedingly steep trundle, but quite easy climbing
compared with a score of mountain passes in asia minor, for the surface
is reasonably smooth, and toward the summit is an ancient stone causeway.
a new and delightful experience awaits me upon the summit of the pass;
the view to the westward is a revelation of mountain scenery altogether
new and novel in my experience, which can now scarcely be called unvaried.
i seem to be elevated entirely above the surface of the earth, and gazing
down through transparent, ethereal depths upon a scene of everchanging
beauty.  fleecy cloudlets are floating lazily over the valley far below
my position, producing on the landscape a panoramic scene of constantly
changing shadows; through the ethery depths, so wonderfully transparent,
the billowy gray foothills, the meandering streams fringed with green,
and miana with its blue-domed mosques and emerald gardens, present a
phantasmagorical appearance, as though they themselves were floating
about in the lower strata of space, and undergoing constant transformation.
perched on an apparently inaccessible crag to the north is an ancient
robber stronghold commanding the pass; it is a natural fortress, requiring
but a few finishing touches by man to render it impregnable in the days
when the maintenance of robber strongholds were possible.  owing to its
walls and battlements being chiefly erected by nature, the persian
peasantry call it the perii-kasr, believing it to have been built by
fairies.  while descending the eastern slope, i surprise a gray lizard
almost as large as a rabbit, basking in the sunbeams; he briskly scuttles
off into the rocks upon being disturbed.

crossing the sefid rud on a dilapidated brickwork bridge, i cross another
range of low hills, among which i notice an abundance of mica cropping
above the surface, and then descend on to a broad, level plain, extending
eastward without any lofty elevation as far as eye can reach.  on this
shelterless plain i am overtaken by a furious equinoctial gale; it comes
howling suddenly from the west, obscuring the recently vacated koflan
koo mountains behind an inky veil, filling the air with clouds of dust,
and for some minutes rendering it necessary to lie down and fairly hang
on to the ground to prevent being blown about.  first it begins to rain,
then to hail; heaven's artillery echoes and reverberates in the koflan
koo mountains, and rolls above the plain, seeming to shake the hailstones
down like fruit from the branches of the clouds, and soon i am enveloped
in a pelting, pitiless downpour of hailstones, plenty large enough to
make themselves felt wherever they strike.  to pitch my tent would have
been impossible, owing to the wind and the suddenness of its appearance.
in thirty minutes or less it is all over; the sun shines out warmly and
dissipates the clouds, and converts the ground into an evaporator that
envelops everything in steam.  in an hour after it quits raining, the
road is dry again, and across the plain it is for the most part excellent
wheeling.

about four o'clock the considerable village of sercham is reached; here,
as at hadji aghi, i at once become the bone of contention between rival
khan-jees wanting to secure me for a guest, on the supposition that i
am going to remain over night.  their anxiety is all unnecessary, however,
for away off on the eastern horizon can be observed clusters of familiar
black dots that awaken agreeable reflections of the night spent in the
koordish camp between ovahjik and khoi.  i remain in sercham long enough
to eat a watermelon, ride, against my will, over rough ground to appease
the crowd, and then pull out toward the koordish camps which are evidently
situated near my proper course.

it seeins to have rained heavily in the mountains and not rained at all
east of sercham, for during the next hour i am compelled to disrobe, and
ford several freshets coursing down ravines over beds that before the
storm were inches deep in dust, the approaching slopes being still dusty;
this little diversion causes me to thank fortune that i have been enabled
to keep in advance of the regular rainy season, which commences a little
later.  striking a koordish camp adjacent to the trail i trundle toward
one of the tents; before reaching it i am overhauled by a shepherd who
hands me a handful of dried peaches from a wallet suspended from his
waist.  the evening air is cool with a suggestion of frostiness, and the
occupants of the tent are found crouching around a smoking tezek fire;
they are ragged and of rather unprepossessing appearance, but being
instinctively hospitable, they shuffle around to make me welcome at the
fire; at first i almost fancy myself mistaken in thinking them koords,
for there is nothing of the neatness and cleanliness of our late
acquaintances about them; on the contrary, they are almost as repulsive
as their sedentary relatives of dele baba-but a little questioning removes
all doubt of their being koords.  they are simply an ill-conditioned
tribe, without any idea whatever of thrift or good management.  they have
evidently been to tabreez or somewhere lately, and invested most of the
proceeds of the season's shearing in three-year-old dried peaches that
are hard enough to rattle like pebbles; sacksful of these edibles are
scattered all over the tent serving for seats, pillows, and general
utility articles for the youngsters to roll about on, jump over, and
throw around; everybody in the camp seems to be chewing these peaches
and throwing them about in sheer wantonness because they are plentiful;
every sack contains finger-holes from which one and all help themselves
ad libitum in wanton disregard of the future.

nearly everybody seems to be suffering from ophthalmia, which is aggravated
by crouching over the densely smoking tezek; and one miserable-looking
old character is groaning and writhing with the pain of a severe stomach-
ache.  by loafing lazily about the tent all day, and chewing these flinty
dried peaches, this hopeful old joker has well-nigh brought himself to
the unhappy condition of the yosemite valley mule, who broke into the
tent and consumed half a bushel of dried peaches; when the hunters
returned to camp and were wondering what marauder had visited their tent
and stolen the peaches, they heard a loud explosion behind the tent;
hastily going out they discover the remnants of the luckless mule scattered
about in all directions.  of course i am appealed to for a remedy, and i
am not sorry to have at last come across an applicant for my services
as a hakim, for whose ailment i can prescribe with some degree of
confidence; to make assurance doubly sure i give the sufferer a double
dose, and in the morning have the satisfaction of finding him entirely
relieved from his misery.  there seems to be no order or sense of good
manners whatever among these people; we have bread and half-stewed peaches
for supper, and while they are cooking, ill-mannered youngsters are
constantly fishing them from the kettles with weed-stalks, meeting with
no sort of reproof from their elders for so doing; when bedtime arrives,
everybody seizes quilts, peach-sacks, etc., and crawls wherever they can
for warmth and comfort; three men, two women, and several children occupy
the same compartment as myself, and gaunt dogs are nosing hungrily about
among us.  about midnight there is a general hallooballoo among the dogs,
and the clatter of horses' hoofs is heard outside the tent; the occupants
of the tent, including myself, spring up, wondering what the disturbance
is all about.  a group of horsemen are visible in the bright moonlight
outside, and one of them has dismounted, and under the guidance of a
shepherd, is about entering the tent; seeing me spring up, and being
afraid lest perchance i might misinterpret their intentions and act
accordingly, he sings out in a soothing voice, "kardash, hamsherri;
kardash, kardash." thus assuring me of their peaceful intentions.  these
midnight visitors turn out to be a party of persian travellers from
miana, from which it would appear they have less fear of the koords
here than in koordistan near the frontier; having, somehow, found out
my whereabouts, they have come to try and persuade me to leave the camp
and join their company to zenjan.  although my own unfavorable impressions
of my entertainers are seconded by the visitors' reiterated assurances
that these koords are bad people, i decline to accompany them, knowing
the folly of attempting to bicycle over these roads by moonlight in the
company of horsemen who would be continually worrying me to ride, no
matter what the condition of the road; after remaining in camp half an
hour they take their departure.

in the morning i discover that my mussulman hat-band has mysteriously
disappeared, and when preparing to depart, a miscellaneous collection
of females gather about me, seize the bicycle, and with much boisterous
hilarity refuse to let me depart until i have given each one of them
some money; their behavior is on the whole so outrageous, that i appeal
to my patient of yesterday evening, in whose bosom i fancy i may perchance
have kindled a spark of gratitude; but the old reprobate no longer has
the stomach-ache, and he regards my unavailing efforts to break away
from my hoi-denish tormentors with supreme indifference, as though there
were nothing extraordinary in their conduct.  the demeanor of these wild-
eyed koordish females on this occasion fully convinces me that the stories
concerning their barbarous conduct toward travellers captured on the
road is not an exaggeration, for while preventing my departure they seem
to take a rude, boisterous delight in worrying me on all sides, like a
gang of puppies barking and harassing anything they fancy powerless to
do them harm.  after i have finally bribed my freedom from the women, the
men seize me and attempt to further detain me until they can send for
their sheikh to come from another camp miles away, to see me ride.  after
waiting a reasonable time, out of respect for their having accommodated
me with quarters for the night, and no signs of the sheikh appearing, i
determine to submit to their impudence no longer; they gather around me
as before, but presenting my revolver and assuming an angry expression,
i threaten instant destruction to the next one laying hands on either
myself or the bicycle; they then give way with lowering brows and sullen
growls of displeasure.  my rough treatment on this occasion compared with
my former visit to a koordish camp, proves that there is as much difference
between the several tribes of nomad koords, as between their sedentary
relatives of dele baba and malosman respectively; for their general
reputation, it were better that i had spent the night in sercham.  a few
miles from the camp, i am overtaken by four horsemen followed by several
dogs and a pig; it proves to be the tardy sheikh and his retainers, who
have galloped several miles to catch me up; the sheikh is a pleasant,
intelligent fellow of thirty or thereabouts, and astonishes me by
addressing me as "monsieur;" they canter alongside for a mile or so,
highly delighted, when the sheikh cheerily sings out "adieu, monsieur!"
and they wheel about and return; had their sheikh been in the camp i
stayed at, my treatment would undoubtedly have been different.  i am at
the time rather puzzled to account for so strange a sight as a pig
galloping briskly behind the horses, taking no notice of the dogs which
continually gambol about him; but i afterward discover that a pet pig,
trained to follow horses, is not an unusual thing among the persians and
persian koords; they are thin, wiry animals of a sandy color, and quite
capable of following a horse for hours; they live in the stable with
their equine companions, finding congenial occupation in rooting around
for stray grains of barley; the horses and pig are said to become very
much attached to each other; when on the road the pig is wont to signify
its disapproval of a too rapid pace, by appealing squeaks and grunts,
whereupon the horse responsively slacks its speed to a more accommodating
speed for its porcine companion.  the road now winds tortuously along the
base of some low gravel hills, and the wheeling perceptibly improves;
beyond nikbey it strikes across the hilly country, and more trundling
becomes necessary.  at nikbey i manage to leave the inhabitants in a
profound puzzle by replying that i am not a ferenghi, but an englishman;
this seems to mystify them not a little, and they commence inquiring
among themselves for an explanation of the difference; they are probably
inquiring yet.  fifty-eight miles are covered from the koordish camp, and
at three o'clock the blue-tiled domes of the zendjan mosques appear in
sight; these blue-tiled domes are more characteristic of persian mosques,
which are usually built of bricks, and have no lofty tapering minarets
as in turkey; the summons to prayers are called from the top of a wall
or roof.  when approaching the city gate, a half-crazy man becomes wildly
excited at the spectacle of a man on a wheel, and, rushing up, seizes
hold of the handle; as i spring from the saddle he rapidly takes to his
heels; finding that i am not pursuing him, he plucks up courage, and
timidly approaching, begs me to let him see me ride again.  zendjan is
celebrated for the manufacture of copper vessels, and the rat-a-tat-tat
of the workmen beating them out in the coppersmiths' quarters is heard
fully a mile outside the gate; the hammering is sometimes deafening while
trundling through these quarters, and my progress through it is indicated
by what might perhaps be termed a sympathetic wave of silence following
me along, the din ceasing at my approach and commencing again with renewed
vigor after i have passed.

mr. f--, a levantine gentleman in charge of the station here, fairly
outdoes himself in the practical interpretation of genuine old-fashioned
hospitality, which brooks no sort of interference with the comfort of
his guest; understanding the perpetual worry a person travelling in so
extraordinary a manner must be subject to among an excessively inquisitive
people like the persians, he kindly takes upon himself the duty of
protecting me from anything of the kind during the day i remain over as
his guest, and so manages to secure me much appreciated rest and quiet.
the governor of the city sends an officer around saying that himself and
several prominent dignitaries would like very much to see the bicycle.
"very good, replies mr. f--, "the bicycle is here, and mr. stevens will
doubtless be pleased to receive his excellency and the leading officials
of zendjan any time it suits their convenience to call, and will probably
have no objections to showing them the bicycle." it is, perhaps, needless
to explain that the governor doesn't turn up; i, however, have an
interesting visitor in the person of the sheikh-ul-islam (head of religious
affairs in zendjan), a venerable-looking old party in flowing gown and
monster turban, whose hands and flowing beard are dyed to a ruddy yellow
with henna.  the sheikh-ul-islam is considered the holiest personage in
zendjan and his appearance and demeanor does not in the least belie his
reputation; whatever may be his private opinion of himself, he makes far
less display of sanctimoniousness than many of the common seyuds, who
usually gather their garments about them whenever they pass a ferenghi
in the bazaar, for fear their clothing should become defiled by brushing
against him.  the sheikh-ul-islam fulfils one's idea of a gentle-bred,
worthy-minded old patriarch; he examines the bicycle and listens to the
account of my journey with much curiosity and interest, and bestows a
flattering mead of praise on the wonderful ingenuity of the ferenghis
as exemplified in my wheel.

>from zeudjan eastward the road gradually improves, and after a dozen
miles develops into the finest wheeling yet encountered in asia; the
country is a gravelly plain between a mountain chain on the left and a
range of lesser hills to the right.  near noon i pass through sultaneah,
formerly a favorite country resort of the persian monarchs; on the broad,
grassy plain, during the autumn, the shah was wont to find amusement in
manoeuvring his cavalry regiments, and for several months an encampment
near sultaneah became the head-quarters of that arm of the service.  the
shah's palace and the blue dome of a large mosque, now rapidly crumbling
to decay, are visible many miles before reaching the village.  the presence
of the shah and his court doesn't seem to have exerted much of a refining
or civilizing influence on the common villagers; otherwise they have
retrograded sadly toward barbarism again since sultaneah has ceased to
be a favorite resort.  they appear to regard the spectacle of a lone
ferenghi meandering through their wretched village on a wheel, as an
opportunity of doing something aggressive for the cause of islam not to
be overlooked; i am followed by a hooting mob of bare-legged wretches,
who forthwith proceed to make things lively and interesting, by pelting
me with stones and clods of dirt.  one of these wantonly aimed missiles
catches me square between the shoulders, with a force that, had it struck
me fairly on the back of the neck, would in all probability have knocked
me clean out of the saddle; unfortunately, several irrigating ditches
crossing the road immediately ahead prevent escape by a spurt, and nothing
remains but to dismount and proceed to make the best of it.  there are
only about fifty of them actively interested, and part of these being
mere boys, they are anything but a formidable crowd of belligerents if
one could only get in among them with a stuffed club; they seem but
little more than human vermin in their rags and nakedness, and like
vermin, the greatest difficulty is to get hold of them.  seeing me dismount,
they immediately take to their heels, only to turn and commence throwing
stones again at finding themselves unpursued; while i am retreating and
actively dodging the showers of missiles, they gradually venture closer
and closer, until things becoming too warm and dangerous, i drop the
bicycle, and make a feint toward them; they then take to their heels,
to return to the attack again as before, when i again commence retreating.
finally i try the experiment of a shot in the air, by way of notifying
them of my ability to do them serious injury; this has the effect of
keeping them at a more respectful distance, but they seem to understand
that i am not intending serious shooting, and the more expert throwers
manage to annoy me considerably until ridable ground is reached; seeing
me mount, they all come racing pell-mell after me, hurling stones, and
howling insulting epithets after me as a ferenghi, but with smooth road
ahead i am, of course, quickly beyond their reach.

the villages east of sultaneah are observed to be, almost without
exception, surrounded by a high mud wall, a characteristic giving them
the appearance of fortifications rather than mere agricultural villages;
the original object of this was, doubtless, to secure themselves against
surprises from wandering tribes; and as the persians seldom think of
changing anything, the custom is still maintained.  bushes are now
occasionally observed near the roadside, from every twig of which a strip
of rag is fluttering in the breeze; it is an ancient custom still kept
up among the persian peasantry when approaching any place they regard
with reverence, as the ruined mosque and imperial palace at sultaneah,
to tear a strip of rag from their clothing and fasten it to some roadside
bush; this is supposed to bring them good luck in their undertakings,
and the bushes are literally covered with the variegated offerings of
the superstitious ryots; where no bushes are handy, heaps of small stones
are indicative of the same belief; every time he approaches the well-known
heap, the peasant picks up a pebble, and adds it to the pile.  owing to
a late start and a prevailing head-wind, but forty-six miles are covered
to-day, when about sundown i seek the accommodation of the chapar-khana,
at heeya; but, providing the road continues good, i promise myself to
polish off the sixty miles between here and kasveen, to-morrow.  the
chaparkhana sleeping apartments at heeya contain whitewashed walls and
reed matting, and presents an appearance of neatness and cleanliness
altogether foreign to these institutions previously patronized; here,
also, first occurs the innovation from "hamsherri" to "sahib," when
addressing me in a respectful manner; it will be sahib, from this point
clear to, through and beyond india; my various titles through the different
countries thus far traversed have been; monsieur, herr, effendi, hamsherri,
and now sahib; one naturally wonders what new surprises are in store
ahead.  a bountiful supper of scrambled eggs (toke-mi-morgue) is obtained
here, and the customary shake-down on the floor.  after getting rid of
the crowd i seek my rude couch, and am soon in the land of unconsciousness;
an hour afterward i am awakened by the busy hum of conversation; and,
behold, in the dim light of a primitive lamp, i become conscious of
several pairs of eyes immediately above me, peering with scrutinizing
inquisitiveness into my face; others are examining the bicycle standing
against the wall at my head.  rising up, i find the chapar-lchana crowded
with caravan teamsters, who, going past with a large camel caravan from
the caspian seaport of eesht, have heard of the bicycle, and come flocking
to my room; i can hear the unmelodious clanging of the big sheet-iron
bells as their long string of camels file slowly past the building.

daylight finds me again on the road, determined to make the best of early
morning, ere the stiff easterly wind, which seems inclined to prevail
of late, commences blowing great guns against me.  a short distance out,
i meet a string of some three hundred laden camels that have not yet
halted after the night's march; scores of large camel caravans have been
encountered since leaving erzeroum, but they have invariably been halting
for the day; these camels regard the bicycle with a timid reserve, merely
swerving a step or two off their course as i wheel past; they all seem
about equally startled, so that my progress down the ranks simply causes
a sort of a gentle ripple along the line, as though each successive camel
were playing a game of follow-my leader.  the road this morning is nearly
perfect for wheeling, consisting of well-trodden camel-paths over a hard
gravelled surface that of itself naturally makes excellent surface for
cycling; there is no wind, and twenty-five miles are duly registered by
the cyclometer when i halt to eat the breakfast of bread and a portion
of yesterday evening's scrambled eggs which i have brought along.  on
past seyudoon and approaching kasveen, the plain widens to a considerable
extent and becomes perfectly level; apparent distances become deceptive,
and objects at a distance assume weird, fantastic shapes; beautiful
mirages hold out their allurements from all directions; the sombre walls
of villages present the appearance of battlemented fortresses rising up
from the mirror-like surface of silvery lakes, and orchards and groves
seem shadowy, undefinable objects floating motionless above the earth.
the telegraph poles traversing the plain in a long, straight line until
lost to view in the hazy distance, appear to be suspended in mid-air;
camels, horses, and all moving objects more than a mile away, present
the strange optical illusion of animals walking through the air many
feet above the surface of the earth.  long rows of kanaat mounds traverse
the plain in every direction, leading from the numerous villages to
distant mountain chains.  descending one of the sloping cavernous entrances
before mentioned, for a drink, i am rather surprised at observing numerous
fishes disporting themselves in the water, which, on the comparatively
level plain, flows but slowly; perhaps they are an eyeless variety similar
to those found in the mammoth cave of kentucky; still they get a glimmering
light from the numerous perpendicular shafts.  flocks of wild pigeons
also frequent these underground water-courses, and the peasantry sometimes
capture them by the hundred with nets placed over the shafts; the kanaats
are not bricked archways, but merely tunnels burrowed through the ground.
three miles of loose sand and stones have to be trundled through before
reaching kasveen; nevertheless my promised sixty miles are overcome, and
i enter the city gate at 2 p.m.  a trundle through several narrow, crooked
streets brings me to an inner gateway emerging upon a broad, smooth
avenue; a short ride down this brings me to a large enclosure containing
the custom-house offices and a fine brick caravanserai.  yet another
prince appears here in the person of a custom-house official; i readily
grant the requested privilege of seeing me ride, but the title of a
persian prince is no longer associated in my mind with greatness and
importance; princes in persia are as plentiful as counts in italy or
barons in germany, yet it rather shocks one's dreams of the splendor of
oriental royalty to find princes manipulating the keys of a one wire
telegraph control-station at a salary of about forty dollars a month (25
tomans), or attending to the prosy duties of a small custom-house.  kasveen
is important as being the half-way station between teheran and the caspian
port of eesht, and on the highway of travel and commerce between northern
persia and europe; added importance is likewise derived from its being
the terminus of a broad level road from the capital, and where travellers
and the mail from teheran have to be transferred from wheeled vehicles
to the backs of horses for the passage over the rugged passes of the
elburz mountains leading to the caspian slope, or vice versa when going
the other way.  locking the bicycle up in a room of the caravanserai, i
take a strolling peep at the nearest streets; a couple of lutis or
professional buffoons, seeing me strolling leisurely about, come hurrying
up; one is leading a baboon by a string around the neck, and the other
is carrying a gourd drum.  reaching me, the man with the baboon commences
making the most ludicrous grimaces and causes the baboon to caper wildly
about by jerking the string, while the drummer proceeds to belabor the
head of his drum, apparently with the single object of extracting as
much noise from it as possible.  putting my fingers to my ears i turn
away; ten minutes afterward i observe another similar combination making
a bee-line for my person; waving them off i continue on down the street;
soon afterward yet a third party attempts to secure me for an audience.
it is the custom for these strolling buffoons to thus present themselves
before persons on the street, and to visit houses whenever there is
occasion for rejoicing, as at a wedding, or the birth of a son; the lutis
are to the persians what italian organ-grinders are among ourselves; i
fancy people give them money chiefly to get rid of their noise and
annoyance, as we do to save ourselves from the soul-harrowing tones of
a wheezy crank organ beneath the window.  among the novel conveyances
observed in the courtyard of the caravanserai is the takhtrowan, a large
sedan chair provided with shafts at either end, and carried between two
mules or horses; another is the before-mentioned kajaveh, an arrangement
not unlike a pair of canvas-covered dog kennels strapped across the back
of an animal; these latter contrivances are chiefly used for carrying
women and children.  after riding around the courtyard several different
times for crowds continually coming, i finally conclude that there must
be a limit to this sort of thing anyhow, and refuse to ride again; the
new-comers linger around, however, until evening, in the hopes that an
opportunity of seeing me ride may present itself.  a number of them then
contribute a handful of coppers, which they give to the proprietor of a
tributary tchai-khan to offer me as an inducement to ride again.  the
wily persians know full well that while a ferenghi would scorn to accept
their handful of coppers, he would probably be sufficiently amused at
the circumstance to reward their persistence by riding for nothing;
telling the grinning khan-jee to pocket the coppers, i favor them with
"positively the last entertainment this evening." an hour later the khan-
jee meets me going toward the bazaar in search of something for supper;
inquiring the object of my search, he takes me back to his tchai-khan,
points significantly to an iron kettle simmering on a small charcoal
fire, and bids me be seated; after waiting on a customer or two, and
supplying me with tea, he quietly beckons me to the fire, removes the
cover and reveals a savory dish of stewed chicken and onions: this he
generously shares with me a few minutes later, refusing to accept any
payment.  as there are exceptions to every rule, so it seems there are
individuals, even among the persian commercial classes, capable of
generous and worthy impulses; true the khan-jee obtained more than the
value of the supper in the handful of coppers - but gratitude is generally
understood to be an unknown commodity among the subjects of the shah.
soon the obstreperous cries of "all akbar, la-al-lah-il-allah" from the
throats of numbers of the faithful perched upon the caravanserai steps,
stable-roof, and other conspicuous soul-inspiring places, announces the
approach of bedtime.  my room is actually found to contain a towel and
an old tooth-brush; the towel has evidently not been laundried for some
time and a public toothbrush is hardly a joy-inspiring object to
contemplate; nevertheless they are evidences that the proprietor of the
caravanserai is possessed of vague, shadowy ideas of a ferenghi's
requirements.  after a person has dried his face with the slanting sunbeams
of early morning, or with his pocket-handkerchief for weeks, the bare
possibility of soap, towels, etc., awakens agreeable reflections of
coming comforts.  at seven o'clock on the following morning i pull out
toward teheran, now but six chopar-stations distant.  running parallel
with the road is the elburz range of mountains, a lofty chain, separating
the elevated plateau of central persia from the moist and wooded slopes
of the caspian sea; south of this great dividing ridge the country is
an arid and barren waste, a desert, in fact, save where irrigation redeems
here and there a circumscribed area, and the mountain slopes are gray
and rocky.  crossing over to the northern side of the divide, one immediately
finds himself in a moist climate, and a country green almost as the
british isles, with dense boxwood forests covering the slopes of the
mountains and hiding the foot-hills beneath an impenetrable mantle of
green.  the elburz mountains are a portion of the great water-shed of
central asia, extending from the himalayas up through afghanistan and
persia into the caucasus, and they perform very much the same office for
the caspian slope of persia, as the sierra nevadas do for the pacific
slope of california, inasmuch as they cause the moisture-laden clouds
rolling in from the sea to empty their burthens on the seaward, slopes
instead of penetrating farther into the interior.

the road continues fair wheeling, but nothing compared with the road
between zendjan and kasveen; it is more of an artificial highway; the
persian government has been tinkering with it, improving it considerably
in some respects, but leaving it somewhat lumpy and unfinished generally,
and in places it is unridable from sand and loose material on the surface;
it has the appreciable merit of levelness, however, and, for persia, is
a very creditable highway indeed.  at four farsakhs from kasveen i reach
the chapar-khana of cawanda, where a breakfast is obtained of eggs and
tea; these two things are among the most readily obtained refreshments
in persia.  the country this morning is monotonous and uninteresting,
being for the most part a stony, level plain, sparsely covered with gray
camel-thorn shrubs.  occasionally one sees in the distance a camp of
eliauts, one of the wandering tribes of persia; their tents are smaller
and of an entirely different shape from the koordish tents, partaking
more of the nature of square-built movable huts than tents; these camps
are too far off my road to justify paying them a visit, especially as i
shall probably have abundant opportunities before leaving the shah's
dominions; but i intercept a straggling party of them crossing the road.
they have a more docile look about them than the koords, have more the
general appearance of gypsies, and they dress but little different from
the ryots of surrounding villages.

at kishlock, where i obtain a dinner of bread and grapes, i find the
cyclometre has registered a gain of thirty-two miles from kasveen; it
has scarcely been an easy thirty-two miles, for i am again confronted
by a discouraging head breeze.  keaching the shah abbas caravanserai of
yeng-imam (all first-class caravanserais are called shah abbas caravanserais,
in deference to so many having been built throughout persia by that
monarch) about five o'clock, i conclude to remain here over night, having
wheeled fifty-three miles.  yeng-imam is a splendid large brick serai,
the finest i have yet seen in persia; many travellers are putting up
here, and the place presents quite a lively appearance.  in the centre
of the court-yard is a large covered spring; around this is a garden of
rose-bushes, pomegranate trees, and flowers; surrounding the garden is
a brick walk, and forming yet a larger square is the caravanserai building
itself, consisting of a one-storied brick edifice, partitioned off into
small rooms.  the building is only one room deep, and each room opens
upon a sort of covered porch containing a fireplace where a fire can be
made and provisions cooked.  attached to the caravanserai, usually beneath
the massive and roomy arched gateway, is a tchai-khan and a small store
where bread, eggs, butter, fruit, charcoal, etc., are to be obtained.
the traveller hires a room which is destitute of all furniture; provides
his own bedding and cooking utensils, purchases provisions and a sufficiency
of charcoal, and proceeds to make himself comfortable.  on a pinch one
can usually borrow a frying-pan or kettle of some kind, and in such
first-class caravanserais as yengimam there is sometimes one furnished
room, carpeted and provided with bedding", reserved for the accommodation
of travellers of importance.

after the customary programme of riding to allay the curiosity and
excitement of the people, i obtain bread, fruit, eggs, butter to cook
them in, and charcoal for a fire, the elements of a very good supper for
a hungry traveller.  borrowing a handleless frying-pan, i am setting about
preparing my own supper, when a respectable-looking persian steps out
from the crowd of curious on-lookers and voluntarily takes this rather
onerous duty out of my hands.  readily obtaining my consent, he quickly
kindles a fire, and scrambles and fries the eggs.  while my volunteer
cook is thus busily engaged, a company of distinguished travellers passing
along the road halt at the tchai-khan to smoke a kalian and drink tea.
the caravanserai proprietor approaches me, and winking mysteriously,
intimates that by going outside and riding for the edification of the
new arrivals i will be pretty certain to get a present of a keran (about
twenty cents).  as he appears anxious to have me accommodate them, i
accordingly go out and favor them with a few turns on a level piece of
ground outside.  after they have departed the proprietor covertly offers
me a half-keran piece in a manner so that everybody can observe him
attempting to give me something without seeing the amount.  the wily
persian had doubtless solicited a present from the travellers for me,
obtained, perhaps, a couple of kerans, and watching a favorable opportunity,
offers me the half-keran piece; the wily ways of these people are several
degrees more ingenious even than the dark ways and vain tricks of bret
harte's "heathen chinee." occupying one of the rooms are two young
noblemen travelling with their mother to visit the governor of zendjan;
after i have eaten my supper, they invite me to their apartments for the
evening; their mother has a samovar under full headway, and a number of
hard boiled eggs.  her two hopeful sons are engaged in a drinking bout
of arrack; they are already wildly hilarious and indulging in brotherly
embraces and doubtful love-songs.  their fond mother regards them with
approving smiles as they swallow glass after glass of the raw fiery
spirit, and become gradually more intoxicated and hilarious.  instead of
checking their tippling, as a fond and prudent ferenghi mother would
have done, this indulgent parent encourages them rather than otherwise,
and the more deeply intoxicated and hilariously happy the sons become,
the happier seems the mother.  about nine o'clock they fall to weeping
tears of affection for each other and for myself, and degenerate into
such maudlin sentimentality generally, that i naturally become disgusted,
accept a parting glass of tea, and bid them good-evening.

the caravanserai-jee assigns me the furnished chamber above referred to;
the room is found to be well carpeted, contains a mattress and an abundance
of flaming red quilts, and on a small table reposes a well-thumbed copy
of the koran with gilt lettering and illumined pages; for these really
comfortable quarters i am charged the trifling sum of one keran.

i am now within fifty miles of teheran, my destination until spring-time
comes around again and enables me to continue on eastward toward the
pacific; the wheeling continues fair, and in the cool of early morning
good headway is made for several miles; as the sun peeps over the summit
of a mountain spur jutting southward
a short distance from the main elburz range, a wall of air comes rushing
from the east as though the sun were making strenuous exertions to usher
in the commencement of another day with a triumphant toot.  multitudes
of donkeys are encountered on the road, the omnipresent carriers of the
persian peasantry, taking produce to the teheran market; the only wheeled
vehicle encountered between kasveen and teheran is a heavy-wheeled,
cumbersome mail wagon, rattling briskly along behind four galloping
horses driven abreast, and a newly imported carriage for some notable
of the capital being dragged by hand, a distance of two hundred miles
from resht, by a company of soldiers.  pedalling laboriously against a
stiff breeze i round the jutting mountain spur about eleven o'clock, and
the conical snow-crowned peak of mount demavend looms up like a beacon-light
from among the lesser heights of the elburz range about seventy-five
miles ahead.  de-niavend is a perfect cone, some twenty thousand feet in
height, and is reputed to be the highest point of land north of the
himalayas.  from the projecting mountain spur the road makes a bee-line
across the intervening plain to the capital; a large willow-fringed
irrigating ditch now traverses the stony plain for some distance parallel
with the road, supplying the caravanserai of shahabad and several adjacent
villages with water.  teheran itself, being situated on the level plain,
and without the tall minarets that render turkish cities conspicuous
from a distance, leaves one undecided as to its precise location until
within a few miles of the gate; it occupies a position a dozen or more
miles south of the base of the elburz mountains, and is flanked on the
east by another jutting spur; to the southward is an extensive plain
sparsely dotted with villages, and the walled gardens of the wealthier
teheranis.


at one o'clock on the afternoon of september 30th, the sentinels at the
kasveen gate of the shah's capital gaze with unutterable astonishment
at the strange spectacle of a lone ferenghi riding toward them astride
an airy wheel that glints and glitters in the bright persian sunbeams.
they look still more wonder-stricken, and half-inclined to think me some
supernatural being, as, without dismounting, i ride beneath the gaudily
colored archway and down the suburban streets.  a ride of a mile between
dead mud walls and along an open business street, and i find myself
surrounded by wondering soldiers and citizens in the great central top-
maidan, or artillery square, and shortly afterward am endeavoring to
eradicate some of the dust and soil of travel, in a room of a wretched
apology for an hotel, kept by a frenchman, formerly a pastry-cook to the
shah.  my cyclometre has registered one thousand five hundred and seventy-six
miles from ismidt; from liverpool to constantinople, where i had no
cyclometre, may be roughly estimated at two thousand five hundred, making
a total from liverpool to teheran of four thousand and seventy-six miles.
in the evening several young englishmen belonging to the staff of the
indo-european telegraph company came round, and re-echoing my own above-
mentioned sentiments concerning the hotel, generously invite mo to become
a member of their comfortable bachelor establishment during my stay in
teheran.  "how far do you reckon it from london to teheran by your
telegraph line."  i inquire of them during our after-supper conversation.
"somewhere in the neighborhood of four thousand miles," is the reply.
"what does your cyclometre say?"






chapter xxi.




teheran.

there is sufficient similarity between the bazaar, the mosques, the
residences, the suburban gardens, etc., of one persian city, and the
same features of another, to justify the assertion that the description
of one is a description of them all.  but the presence of the shah and
his court; the pomp and circumstance of eastern royalty; the foreign
ambassadors; the military; the improvements introduced from europe; the
royal palaces of the present sovereign; the palaces and reminiscences
of former kings - all these things combine to effectually elevate teheran
above the somewhat dreary sameness of provincial cities.  a person in the
habit of taking daily strolls here and there about the city will scarcely
fail of obtaining a glimpse of the shah, incidentally, every few days.
in this respect there is little comparison to be made between him and
the sultan of turkey, who never emerges from the seclusion of the palace,
except to visit the mosque, or on extraordinary occasions; he is then
driven through streets between compact lines of soldiers, so that a
glimpse of his imperial person is only to be obtained by taking considerable
trouble.  since the shah's narrow escape from assassination at the hands
of the baabi conspirators in 1867, he has exercised more caution than
formerly about his personal safety.  previous to that affair, it was
customary for him to ride on horseback well in advance of his body-guard;
but nowadays, he never rides in advance any farther than etiquette
requires him to, which is about the length of his horse's neck.  when his
frequent outings take him beyond the city fortifications, he is generally
provided with, both saddle-horse and carriage, thus enabling him to
change from one to the other at will.  the shah is evidently not indifferent
to the fulsome flattery of the courtiers and sycophants about him, nor
insensible of the pomp and vanity of his position; nevertheless he is
not without a fair share of common-sense.  perhaps the worst that can be
said of him is, that he seems content to prostitute his own more enlightened
and progressive views to the prejudices of a bigoted and fanatical
priesthood.  he seems to have a generous desire to see the country opened
up to the civilizing improvements of the west, and to give the people
an opportunity of emancipating themselves from their present deplorable
condition; but the mollahs set their faces firmly against all reform,
and the shah evidently lacks the strength of will to override their
opposition.  it was owing to this criminal weakness on his part that baron
eeuter's scheme of railways and commercial regeneration for the country
proved a failure.  persia is undoubtedly the worst priest-ridden country
in the world; the mollaha influence everything and everybody, from the
monarch downward, to such an extent that no progress is possible.  barring
outside interference, persia will remain in its present wretched condition
until the advent of a monarch with sufficient force of character to
deliver the ipeople from the incubus of their present power and influence:
nothing short of a general massacre, however, will be likely to
accomplish complete deliverance.  without compromising his dignity as
"shah-iri-shah," "the asylum of the universe," etc., when dealing with
his own subjects, nasr-e-deen shall has profited by the experiences of
his european tour to the extent of recognizing, with becoming toleration,
the democratic independence of ferenghis, whose deportment betrays the
fact that they are not dazed by the contemplation of his greatness.  the
other evening myself and a friend encountered the shah and his crowd of
attendants on one of the streets leading to the winter palace; he was
returning to the palace in state after a visit of ceremony to some
dignitary.  first came a squad of foot-runners in quaint scarlet coats,
knee-breeches, white stockings, and low shoes, and with a most fantastic
head-dress, not unlike a peacock's tail on dress-parade; each runner
carried a silver staff; they, were clearing the street and shouting their
warning for everybody to hide their faces.  behind them came a portion
of the shah's khajar bodyguard, well mounted, and dressed in a gray
uniform, braided with black: each of these also carries a silver staff,
and besides sword and dagger, has a gun slung at his back in a red 'baize
case.  next came the royal carriage, containing the shah: the carriage
is somewhat like a sheriffs coach of "ye olden tyme," and is drawn by
six superb grays; mounted on the off horses are three postilions in
gorgeous scarlet liveries.  immediately behind the shah's carriage, came
the higher dignitaries on horseback, and lastly a confused crowd of three
or four hundred horsemen.  as the royal procession approached, the persians-
one and all-either hid themselves, or backed themselves up against the
wall, and remained with heads bowed half-way to the ground until it
passed.  seeing that we had no intention of striking this very submissive
and servile attitude, first the scarlet foot-runners, and then the advance
of the khajar guard, addressed themselves to us personally, shouting
appealingly as though very anxious about it: "sahib. sahib!" and motioned
for us to do as the natives were doing.  these valiant guardians of the
shah's barbaric gloriousness cling tenaciously to the belief that it is
the duty of everybody, whether ferenghi or native, to prostrate themselves
in this manner before him, although the monarch himself has long ceased
to expect it, and is very well satisfied if the ferenghi respectfully
doffs his hat as he goes past.  much of the nonsensical glamour and
superstitious awe that formerly surrounded the person of oriental
potentates has been dissipated of late years by the moral influence of
european residents and travellers.  but a few years ago, it was certain
death for any luckless native who failed to immediately scuttle off
somewhere out of sight, or to turn his face to the wall, whenever the
carriages of the royal ladies passed by; and europeans generally turned
down a side street to avoid trouble when they heard the attending eunuchs
shouting "gitchin, gitchin!" (begone, begone!) down the street.  but
things may be done with impunity now. that before the shah's eye-opening
visit to frangistan would have been punished with instant death; and
although the eunuchs shout "gitchin, gitchin!" as lustily as ever,
they are now content if people will only avert their faces respectfully
as the carriages drive past.

an eccentric austrian gentleman once saw fit to imitate the natives in
turning their faces to the wall, and improved upon the time-honored
custom to the extent of making salaams from the back of his head.  this
singular performance pleased the ladies immensely, and they reported it
to the shah.  sending for the austrian, the shah made him repeat the
performance in his presence, and was so highly amused that he dismissed
him with a handsome present.

prominent among the improvements that have been introduced in teheran
of late, may be mentioned gas and the electric light.  "were one to make
this statement and enter into no further explanations, the impression
created would doubtless be illusive; for although the fact remains that
these things are in existence here, they could be more appropriately
placed under the heading of toys for the gratification of the shah's
desire to gather about him some of the novel and interesting things he
had seen in europe, than improvements made with any idea of benefiting
the condition of the city as a whole.  indeed, one might say without
exaggeration, that nothing new or beneficial is ever introduced into
persia, except for the personal gratification or glorification of the
shah; hence it is, that, while a few european improvements are to be
seen in teheran, they are found nowhere else in persia.  coal of an
inferior quality is obtained in the elburz mountains, near kasveen, and
brought on the backs of camels to teheran; and enough gas is manufactured
to supply two rows of lamps leading from the lop-maidan to the palace
front, two rows on the east side of the palace, and a dozen more in the
top-maid.an itself.  the gas is of the poorest quality, and the lamps
glimmer faintly through the gloom of a moonless evening until half-past
nine, giving about as much light, or rather making darkness about as
visible as would the same number of tallow candles; at this hour they
are extinguished, and any persian found outside of his own house later
than this, is liable to be arrested and fined.

the electric light improvements consist of four lights, on ordinary
gas-lamp posts, in the top-maidan, and a more ornamental and pretentious
affair, immediately in front of the palace; these are only used on special
occasions.  the electric lights are a never-failing source of wonder and
mystification to the common people of the city and the peasants coming
in from the country.  a stroll into the maidan any evening when the four
electric lights are making the gas-lamps glimmer feebler than ever,
reveals a small crowd of natives assembled about each post, gazing
wonderingiy up at the globe, endeavoring to penetrate the secret of its
brightness, and commenting freely among themselves in this wise:
"mashallah. abdullah," says one, " here does all the light come from.
they put no candles in, no naphtha, no anything; where does it come from?"

"mashallah!" replies abdullah, "i don't know; it lights up 'biff!'
all of a sudden, without anybody putting matches to it, or going anywhere
near it; nobody knows how it comes about except sheitan (satan) and
sheitan's children, the ferenghis."

"al-lah! it is wonderful." echoes another, "and our shah is a wonderful
being to give us such things to look at - allah be praised!"

all these strange innovations and incomprehensible things produce a deep
impression on the unenlightened minds of the common persians, and helps
to deify the shah in their imagination; for although they know these
things come from frangistan, it seems natural for them to sing the praises
of the shah in connection with them.  they think these five electric
lights in teheran among the wonders of the world; the glimmering gas-lamps
and the electric lights help to rivet their belief that their capital
is the most wonderful city in the world, and their shah the greatest
monarch extant.  these extreme ideas are, of course, considerably improved
upon when we leave the ranks of illiteracy; but the persians capable of
forming anything like an intelligent comparison between themselves and
a european nation, are confined to the shah himself, the corps diplomatique,
and a few prominent personages who have been abroad.  always on the lookout
for something to please the shah, the news of my arrival in teheran on
the bicycle no sooner reaches the ear of the court officials than the
monarch hears of it himself.  on the seventh day after my arrival an
officer of the palace calls on behalf of the shah, and requests that i
favor them all, by following the soldiers who will be sent to-morrow
morning, at eight o'clock, ferenghi time, to conduct me to the palace,
where it is appointed that i am to meet the "shah-in-shah and king of
kings," and ride with him, on the bicycle, to his summer palace at
doshan tepe.

"yes, i shall, of course, be most happy to accommodate; and to be the
means of introducing to the notice of his majesty, the wonderful iron
horse, the latest wonder from frangistan," i reply; and the officer,
after salaaming with more than french politeness, takes his departure.
promptly at the hour appointed the soldiers present themselves; and after
waiting a few minutes for the horses of two young englishmen who desire
to accompany us part way, i mount the ever-ready bicycle, and together
we follow my escort along several fairly ridable streets to the office
of the foreign minister.  the soldiers clear the way of pedestrians,
donkeys, camels, and horses, driving them unceremoniously to the right,
to the left, into the ditch - anywhere out of my road; for am i not for
the time being under the shah's special protection.  i am as much the
shah's toy and plaything of the moment, as an electric light, a stop-watch,
or as the big krupp gun, the concussion of which nearly scared the
soldiers out of their wits, by shaking down the little minars of one
of the city gates, close to which they had unwittingly discharged it on
first trial.  the foreign office, like every building of pretension,
whether public or private, in the land of the lion and the sun, is a
substantial edifice of mud and brick, inclosing a square court-yard or
garden, in which splashing fountains play amid a wealth of vegetation
that springs, as if by waft of magician's wand, from the sandy soil of
persia wherever water is abundantly supplied.  tall, slender poplars are
nodding in the morning breeze, the less lofty almond and pomegranate,
sheltered from the breezes by the surrounding building, rustle never a
leaf, but seem to be offering pomona's choice products of nuts and rosy
pomegranates, with modest mien and silence; whilst beds of rare exotics,
peculiar to this sunny clime, imparts to the atmosphere of the cool
shaded garden, a pleasing sense of being perfumed.  here, by means of the
shah's interpreter, i am introduced to nasr-i-mulk, the persian foreign
minister, a kindly-faced yet business-looking old gentleman, at whose
request i mount and ride with some difficulty around the confined and
quite unsuitable foot-walks of the garden; a crowd of officials and
farrashes look on in unconcealed wonder and delight.  true to their persian
characteristic of inquisitiveness, nasr-i-mulk and the officers catechise
me unmercifully for some time concerning the mechanism and capabilities
of the bicycle, and about the past and future of the journey around the
world.  in company with the interpreter, i now ride out to the doshan
tepe gate, where we are to await the arrival of the shah.  from the doshan
tepe gate is some four english miles of fairly good artificial road,
leading to one of the royal summer palaces and gardens.  his majesty goes
this morning to the mountains beyond doshan tepe on a shooting excursion,
and wishes me to ride out with his party a few miles, thus giving him a
good opportunity of seeing something of what bicycle travelling is like.
the tardy monarch keeps myself and a large crowd of attendants waiting
a full hour at the gate, ere he puts in an appearance.  among the crowd
is the shah's chief shikaree (hunter), a grizzled old veteran, beneath
whose rifle many a forest prowler of the caspian slope of mazanderau has
been laid low.  the shikaree, upon seeing me ride, and not being able to
comprehend how one can possibly maintain the equilibrium, exclaims:
"oh, ayab ingilis." (oh, the wonderful english!) everybody's face is
wreathed in smiles at the old shikaree's exclamation of wonderment, and
when i jokingly advise him that he ought to do his hunting for the future
on a bicycle, and again mount and ride with hands off handles to demonstrate
the possibility of shooting from the saddle, the delighted crowd of
horsemen burst out in hearty laughter, many of them exclaiming, "bravo!
bravo!" at length the word goes round that the shah is coming.  everybody
dismounts, and as the royal carriage drives up, every persian bows his
head nearly to the ground, remaining in that highly submissive attitude
until the carriage halts and the shah summons myself and the interpreter
to his side.  i am the only ferenghi in the party, my two english companions
having returned to the city, intending to rejoin me when i separate from
the shah.

the shah impresses one as being more intelligent than the average persian
of the higher class; and although they are, as a nation, inordinately
inquisitive, no persian has taken a more lively interest in the bicycle
than his majesty seems to take, as, through his interpreter, he plys me
with all manner of questions.  among other questions he asks if the koords
didn't molest me when coming through koordistan without an escort; and
upon hearing the story of my adventure with the koordish shepherds between
ovahjik and khoi, he seems greatly amused.  another large party of horsemen
arrived with the shah, swelling the company to perhaps two hundred
attendants.  pedaling alongside the carriage, in the best position for
the shah to see, we proceed toward doshan tepe, the crowd of horsemen
following, some behind and others careering over the stony plain through
which the doshan tepe highway leads.  after covering about half a mile,
the shah leaves the carriage and mounts a saddle-horse, in order to the
better "put me through some exercises." first he requests me to give
him an exhibition of speed; then i have to ride a short distance over
the rough stone-strewn plain, to demonstrate the possibility of traversing
a rough country, after which he desires to see me ride at the slowest
pace possible.  all this evidently interests him not a little, and he
seems even more amused than interested, laughing quite heartily several
times as he rides alongside the bicycle.  after awhile he again exchanges
for the carriage, and at four miles from the city gate we arrive at the
palace garden.  through this garden is a long, smooth walk, and here the
shah again requests an exhibition of my speeding abilities.  the garden
is traversed with a network of irrigating ditches; but i am assured there
is nothing of the kind across the pathway along which he wishes me to
ride as fast as possible.  two hundred yards from the spot where this
solemn assurance is given, it is only by a lightning-like dismount that
i avoid running into the very thing that i was assured did not exist-it
was the narrowest possible escape from what might have proved a serious
accident.

riding back toward the advancing party, i point out my good fortune in
escaping the tumble.  the shah asks if people ever hurt themselves by
falling off bicycles; and the answer that a fall such as i would have
experienced by running full speed into the irrigating ditch, might
possibly result in broken bones, appeared to strike him as extremely
humorous; from the way he laughed i fancy the sending me flying toward
the irrigating ditch was one of the practical jokes that he is sometimes
not above indulging in.  after mounting and forcing my way for a few yards
through deep, loose gravel, to satisfy his curiosity as to what could
be done in loose ground, i trundle along with him to a small menagerie
he keeps at this place.  on the way he inquires about the number of
wheelmen there are in england and america; whether i am english or
american; why they don't use iron tires on bicycles instead of rubber,
and many other questions, proving the great interest aroused in him by
the advent of the first bicycle to appear in his capital.  the menagerie
consists of one cage of monkeys, about a dozen lions, and two or three
tigers and leopards.  we pass along from cage to cage, and as the keeper
coaxes the animals to the bars, the shah amuses himself by poking them
with an umbrella.  it was arranged in the original programme that i should
accompany them up into their rendezvous in the foot-hills, about a mile
beyond the palace, to take breakfast with the party; but seeing the
difficulty of getting up there with the bicycle, and not caring to spoil
the favorable impression already made, by having to trundle up, i ask
permission to take my leave at this point, the request is granted, and
the interpreter returns with me to the city - thus ends my memorable
bicycle ride with the shah of persia.

soon after my ride with the shah, the naib-i-sultan, the governor of
teheran and commander-in-chief of the army, asked me to bring the bicycle
down to the military maidan, and ride for the edification of himself and
officers.  being busy at something or other when the invitation was
received, i excused myself and requested that he make another appointment.
i am in the habit of taking a constitutional spin every morning; by means
of which i have figured as an object of interest, and have been stared
at in blank amazement by full half the wonder-stricken population of the
city.  the fame of my journey, the knowledge of my appearance before the
shah, and my frequent appearance upon the streets, has had the effect
of making me one of the most conspicuous characters in the persian
capital; and the people have bestowed upon me the expressive and
distinguishing title of "the aspi sahib" (horse-of-iron sahib).

a few mornings after receiving the naib-i-sultan's invitation, i happened
to be wheeling past the military maidan, and attracted by the sound of
martial music inside, determined to wheel in and investigate.  perhaps
in all the world there is no finer military parade ground than in teheran;
it consists of something over one hundred acres of perfectly level ground,
forming a square that is walled completely in by alcoved walls and
barracks, with gaily painted bala-kkanas over the gates.  the delighted
guards at the gate make way and present arms, as they see me approaching;
wheeling inside, i am somewhat taken aback at finding a general review
of the whole teheran garrison in progress; about ten thousand men are
manoeuvring in squads, companies, and regiments over the ground.

having, from previous experience on smaller occasions, discovered that
my appearance on the incomprehensible "asp-i-awhan" would be pretty
certain to temporarily demoralize the troops and create general disorder
and inattention, i am for a moment undetermined about whether to advance
or retreat.  the acclamations of delight and approval from the nearest
troopers at seeing me enter the gate, however, determines me to advance;
and i start off at a rattling pace around the square, and then take a
zig-zag course through the manoeuvring bodies of men.

the sharp-shooters lying prostrate in the dust, mechanically rise up to
gaze; forgetting their discipline, squares of soldiers change into
confused companies of inattentive men; simultaneous confusion takes place
in straight lines of marching troops, and the music of the bands degenerates
into inharmonious toots and discordant squeaks, from the inattention of
the musicians.  all along the line the signal runs - not "every persian
is expected to do his duty," but "the asp-i-awhan sahib! the asp-i-awhan
sahib!" the whole army is in direful commotion.  in the midst of the
general confusion, up dashes an orderly, who requests that i accompany
him to the presence of the commander-in-chief and staff; which, of course,
i readily do, though not without certain misgivings as to my probable
reception under the circumstances.  there is no occasion for misgivings,
however; the naib-i-sultan, instead of being displeased at the interruption
to the review, is as delighted at the appearance of "the asp-i-anhan,
as is abdul, the drummer-boy, and he has sent for me to obtain a closer
acquaintance.  after riding for their edification, and answering their
multifarious questions, i suggest to the commander-in-chief that he ought
to mount the shah's favorite regiment of cossacks on bicycles.  the
suggestion causes a general laugh among the company, and he replies:
"yes, asp-i-awhan cossacks would look very splendid on our dress parade
here in the maidan; but for scouting over our rough persian mountains"
- and the naib-i-sultan finished the sentence with a laugh and a negative
shrug of his shoulders.  two mornings after this i take a spin out on the
doshan tepe road, and, upon wheeling through the city gate, i find myself
in the immediate presence of another grand review, again under the
personal inspection of the naibi-sultan.  disturbing two grand reviews
within "two days is, of course, more than i bargained for, and i would
gladly have retreated through the gate; but coming full upon them
unexpectedly, i find it impossible to prevent the inevitable result.  the
troops are drawn up in line about fifty yards from the road, and are for
the moment standing at ease, awaiting the arrival of the shah, while the
commander-in-chief and his staff are indulging in soothing whiffs at the
seductive kalian.  the cry of "asp-i-awhan sahib!" breaks out all along
the line, and scores of soldiers break ranks, and come running helter-skelter
toward the road, regardless of the line-officers, who frantically endeavor
to wave them back.  dashing ahead, i am soon beyond the lines, congratulating
myself that the effects of my disturbing presence is quickly over; but
ere long, i discover that there is no other ridable road back, and am
consequently compelled to pass before them again on returning.  accordingly,
i hasten to return, before the arrival of the shah.  seeing me returning,
the naib-i-sultan and his staff advance to the road, with kalians in
hand, their oval faces wreathed in smiles of approbation; they extend
cordial salutations as i wheel past.  the persians seem to do little more
than play at soldiering; perhaps in no other army in the world could a
lone cycler demoralize a general review twice within two days, and then
be greeted with approving smiles and cordial salutations by the commander
and his entire staff.  through november and the early part of december,
the weather in teheran continues, on the whole, quite agreeable, and
suitable for short-distance wheeling; but mindful of the long distance
yet before me, and the uncertainty of touching at any point where supplies
could be forwarded, i deem it advisable to take my exercise afoot, and
save my rubber tires for the more serious work of the journey to the
pacific.  there are no green lanes down which to stroll, nor emerald meads
through which to wander about the persian capital, though what green
things there are, retain much of their greenness until the early winter
months.  the fact of the existence of any green thing whatever - and even
to a greater extent, its survival through the scorching summer months -
depending almost wholly on irrigation, enables vegetation to retain its
pristine freshness almost until suddenly pounced upon and surprised by
the frost.  there is no springy turf, no velvety greensward in the land
of the lion and the sun.  no sooner does one get beyond the vegetation,
called into existence by the moisture of an irrigating ditch or a stream,
than the bare, gray surface of the desert crunches beneath one's tread.
there is an avenue leading part way from the city to the summer residence
of the english minister at gulaek, that conjures up memories of an english
lane; but the double row of chenars, poplars, and jujubes are kept alive
by irrigation, and all outside is verdureless desert.

things are valued everywhere for their scarcity, and a patch of greensward
large enough to recline on, a shady tree or shrub, and a rippling rivulet
are appreciated in persia at their proper value- appreciated more than
broad, green pastures and waving groves of shade-trees in moister climes.
moreover, there is a peculiar charm in these bright emerald gems, set
in sombre gray, be they never so small and insignificant in themselves,
that is not to be experienced where the contrast is less marked.  scattered
here and there about the stony plain between teheran and the elburz foot-
hills, are many beautiful gardens-beautiful for persia-where a pleasant
hour can be spent wandering beneath the shady avenues and among the
fountains.  these gardens are simply patches redeemed from the desert
plain, supplied with irrigating water, and surrounded with a high mud
wall; leading through the garden are gravelled walks, shaded by rows of
graceful chenars.  the gardens are planted with fig, pomegranate, almond
or apricot trees, grape-vines, melons, etc.; they are the property of
wealthy teheranis who derive an income from the sale of the fruit in the
teheran market.  the ample space within the city ramparts includes a
number of these delightful retreats, some of them presenting the additional
charm of historic interest, from having been the property and, peradventure,
the favorite summer residence of a former king.  such a one is an extensive
garden in the northeast quarter of the city, in which was situated one
of the favorite summer palaces of fatteh-ali shah, grandfather of nasree.

it was chiefly to satisfy my curiosity as to the truth of the current
stories regarding that merry monarch, and his. exceedingly novel methods
of entertaining himself, that i accepted the invitation of a friend to
visit this garden one afternoon.  my friend is the owner of a pair of
white bull-dogs, who accompany us into the garden.  after strolling about
a little, we are shown into the summer palace; into the audience room,
where we are astonished at the beautiful coloring and marvellously life-
like representations in the old persian frescoing on the walls and
ceiling.  depicted in life-size are fatteh-ali shah and his courtiers,
together with the european ambassadors, painted in the days when the
persian court was a scene of dazzling splendor.  the monarch is portrayed
as an exceedingly handsome man with a full, black beard, and is covered
with a blaze of jewels that are so faithfully pictured as to appear
almost like real gems on the walls.  it seems strange - almost startling -
to come in from contemplating the bare, unlovely mud walls of the city, and
find one's self amid the life-like scenes of fatteh-ali shah's court;
and, amid the scenes to find here and there an english face, an english
figure, dressed in the triangular cockade, the long hessian pigtail, the
scarlet coat with fold-back tails, the knee-breeches, the yellow stockings,
the low shoes, and the long, slender rapier of a george iii. courtier.
>from here we visit other rooms, glittering rooms, all mirror-work and
white stucco.  into rooms we go whose walls consist of myriads of tiny
squares of rich stained glass, worked into intricate patterns and
geometrical designs, but which are now rapidly falling into decay; and
then we go to see the most novel feature of the garden-fatteh-ali shah's
marble slide, or shute.  passing along a sloping, arched vault beneath a
roof of massive marble, we find ourselves in a small, subterranean court,
through which a stream of pure spring water is flowing along a white
marble channel, and where the atmosphere must be refreshingly cool even
in the middle of summer.  in the centre of the little court is a round
tank about four feet deep, also of white marble, which can be filled at
pleasure with water, clear as crystal, from the running stream.  leading
from an upper chamber, and overlapping the tank, is a smooth-worn marble
slide or shute, about twenty feet long and four broad, which is pitched
at an angle that makes it imperative upon any one trusting themselves
to attempt the descent, to slide helplessly into the tank.  here, on
summer afternoons, with the chastened daylight peeping through a stained-
glass window in the roof, and carpeting the white marble floor with
rainbow hues, with the only entrance to the cool and massive marble
court, guarded by armed retainers, who while guarding it were conscious
of guarding their own precious lives, fattehali shah was wont to beguile
the hours away by making merry with the bewitching nymphs of his anderoon,
transforming them for the nonce into naiads.

there are no nymphs nor naiads here now, nothing but the smoothly-worn
marble shute to tell the tale of the merry past; but we obtain a realistic
idea of their sportive games by taking the bulldogs to the upper chamber,
and giving them a start down the slide.  as they clutch and claw, and
look scared, and appeal mutely for assistance, only to slide gradually
down, down, down, and fall with a splash into the tank at last, we have
only to imagine the bull-dogs transformed into fatteh-ali shah's naiads,
to learn something of the truth of current stories.  after we have slid
the dogs down a few times, and they begin to realize that they are not
sliding hopelessly down to destruction, they enjoy the sport as much as
we, or as much as the naiads perhaps did a hundred years ago.  that portion
of the teheran bazaar immediately behind the shah's winter palace, is
visited almost daily by europeans, and their presence excites little
comment or attention from the natives; but i had frequently heard the
remark that a ferenghi couldn't walk through the southern, or more
exclusive native quarters, without being insulted.  determined to
investigate, i sallied forth one afternoon alone, entering the bazaar
on the east side of the palace wall, where i had entered it a dozen times
before.

the streets outside are sloppy with melting snow, and the roofed passages
of the bazaar, being dry underfoot, are crowded with people to an unusual
extent; albeit they are pretty well crowded at any time.  most of the
dervishes in the city have been driven, by the inclemency of the weather,
to seek shelter in the bazaar; these, added to the no small number who
make the place their regular foraging ground, render them a greater
nuisance than ever.  they are encountered in such numbers, that no matter
which way i turn, i am confronted by a rag-bedecked mendicant, with a
wild, haggard countenance and grotesque costume, thrusting out his gourd
alms-receiver, and muttering "huk yah huk!" each in his own peculiar
way.  the mollahs, with their flowing robes, and huge white turbans,
likewise form no inconsiderable proportion of the moving throng; they
are almost without exception scrupulously neat and clean in appearance,
and their priestly costume and pharisaical deportment gives them a certain
air of stateliness.  they wear the placid expression of men so utterly
puffed up with the notion of their own sanctity, that their self-consciousness
verily scorns to shine through their skins, and to impart to them a
sleek, oily appearance.  one finds himself involuntarily speculating on
how they all manage to make a living; the mollah "toils not, neither
does he spin," and almost every other person one meets is a mollah.

the bazaar is a common thoroughfare for anything and everything that can
make its way through.  donkey-riders, horsemen, and long strings of camels
and pack-mules add their disturbing influence to the general confusion;
and although hundreds of stalls are heaped up with every merchantable
thing in the city, scores of donkeys laden with similar products are
meandering about among the crowd, the venders shouting their wares with
lusty lungs.  in many places the din is quite deafening, and the odors
anything but agreeable to european nostrils; but the natives are not
over fastidious.  the steam issuing from the cook-shops, from coppers of
soup, pillau and sheeps'-trotters, and the less objectionable odors from
places where busy men are roasting bazaar-kabobs for hungry customers
all day long, mingle with the aromatic contributions from the spice and
tobacco shops wedged in between them.

the sleek-looking spice merchant, squatting contentedly beside a pan of
glowing embers, smoking kalian after kalian in dreamy contemplation of
his assistant waiting on customers, and also occasionally waiting on him
to the extent of replenishing the fire on the kalian, is undoubtedly the
happiest of mortals.  with a kabob-shop on one hand, a sheeps'-trotter-shop
on the other, and a bakery and a fruit-stand opposite, he indulges in
tid-bits from either when he is hungry.  with nothing to do but smoke
kalians amid the fragrant aroma of his own spices, and keep a dreamy eye
on what passes on around him, his persian notions of a desirable life
cause him to regard himself as blest beyond comparison with those whose
avocations necessitate physical exertion.  all the shops are open front
places, like small fruit and cigar stands in an american city, the goods
being arranged on boards or shelving, sloping down to the front, or
otherwise exposed to the best advantage, according to the nature of the
wares; the shops have no windows, but are protected at night by wooden
shutters.  the piping notes of the flute, or the sing-song voice of the
troubadour or story-teller is heard behind the screened entrance of the
tchai-khans, and now and then one happens across groups of angry men
quarrelling violently over some trifling difference in a bargain; noise
and confusion everywhere reign supreme.  here the road is blocked up by
a crowd of idlers watching a trio of lutis, or buffoons, jerking a
careless and indifferent-looking baboon about with a chain to make him
dance; and a little farther along is another crowd surveying some more
lutis with a small brown bear.  both the baboon and the bear look better
fed than their owners, the contributions of the onlookers consisting
chiefly of eatables, bestowed upon the animals for the purpose of seeing
them feed.  half a mile, or thereabouts, from the entrance, an inferior
quarter of the bazaar is reached; the crowds are less dense, the noise
is not near so deafening, and the character of the shops undergoes a
change for the worse.  a good many of the shops are untenanted, and a
good many others are occupied by artisans manufacturing the ruder articles
of commerce, such as horseshoes, pack-saddles, and the trappings of
camels.  such articles as kalians, che-bouks and other pipes, geivehs,
slippers and leather shoes, hats, jewelry, etc., are generally manufactured
on the premises in the better portions of the bazaar, where they are
sold.  perched in among the rude cells of industry are cook-shops and
tea-drinking establishments of an inferior grade; and the occupants of
these places eye me curiously, and call one another's attention to the
unusual circumstance of a ferenghi passing through their quarter.  after
half a mile of this, my progress is abruptly terminated by a high mud
wall, with a narrow passage leading to the right.  i am now at the southern
extremity of the bazaar, and turn to retrace my footsteps.  so far i have
encountered no particular disposition to insult anybody; only a little
additional rudeness and simple inquisitive-ness, such as might very
naturally have been expected.  but ere i have retraced my way three hundred
yards, i meet a couple of rowdyish young men of the charuadar class; no
sooner have i passed them than one of them wantonly delivers himself of
the promised insult - a peculiar noise with the mouth; they both start off
at a run as though expecting to be pursued and punished.  as i turn
partially round to look, an old pomegranate vender stops his donkey, and
with a broad grin of amusement motions me to give chase.  when nearing
the more respectable quarter again, i stroll up one of the numerous
ramifications leading toward what looks, like a particularly rough and
dingy quarter.  before going many steps i am halted by a friendly-faced
sugar merchant, with "sahib," and sundry significant shakes of the head,
signifying, if he were me, he wouldn't go up there.  and thus it is in
the teheran bazaar; where a ferenghi will get insulted once, he will
find a dozen ready to interpose with friendly officiousness between him
and anything likely to lead to unpleasant consequences.  on the whole, a
european fares better than a persian in his national costume would in
an occidental city, in spite of the difference between our excellent
police regulations and next to no regulations at all; he fares better
than a chinaman does in new york.  the teheran bazaar, though nothing to
compare to the world-famous bazaar at stamboul, is wonderfully extensive.
i was under the impression that i had been pretty much all through it
at different times; but a few days after my visit to the "slummy "
quarters, i follow a party of corpse-bearers down a passage-way hitherto
unexplored, to try and be present at a persian funeral, and they led the
way past at least a mile of shops i had never yet seen.  i followed the
corpse-bearers through the dark passages and narrow alley-ways of the
poorer native quarter, and in spite of the lowering brows of the followers,
penetrated even into the house where they washed the corpses before
burial; but here the officiating mollahs scowled with such unmistakable
displeasure, and refused to proceed in my presence, so that i am forced
to beat a retreat.  the poorer native quarter of teheran is a shapeless
jumble of mud dwellings, and ruins of the same; the streets are narrow
passages describing all manner of crooks and angles in and out among
them.  as i emerge from the vaulted bazaar the sun is almost setting, and
the musicians in the bala-khanas of the palace gates are ushering in the
close of another day with discordant blasts from ancient persian trumpets,
and belaboring hemispherical kettle- drums.  these musicians are dressed
in fantastic scarlet uniforms, not unlike the costume of a fifteen century
jester, and every evening at sundown they repair to these balakhanas,
and for the space of an hour dispense the most unearthly music imaginable.
tubes of brass about five feet long, which respond to the efforts of a
strong-winded person, with a diabolical basso-profundo shriek that puts a
newfoundland fog-horn entirely in the shade.  when a dozen of these
instruments are in full blast, without any attempt at harmony, it seems to
shed a depressing shadow of barbarism over the whole city.  this sunset
music is, i think, a relic of very old times, and it jars on the nerves
like the despairing howl of ancient persia, protesting against the
innovation from the pomp and din and glamour of her old pagan glories,
to the present miserable era of mollah rule and feeble dependence for
national existence on the forbearance or jealousy of other nations.
beneath the musicians' gate, and i emerge into a small square which is half
taken up by a square tank of water; near the tank is a large bronze cannon.
it is a huge, unwieldy piece, and a muzzle-loader, utterly useless to such
a people as the persians, except for ornament, or perhaps to help impress
the masses with an idea of the shah's unapproachable greatness.

it is the special hour of prayer, and in every direction may be observed
men, halting in whatever they may be doing, and kneeling down on some
outer garment taken off for the purpose, repeatedly touch their foreheads
to the ground, bending in the direction of mecca.  passing beneath the
second musicians' gate, i reach the artillery square just in time to see
a company of army buglers formed in line at one end, and a company of
musketeers at the other.  as these more modern trumpeters proceed to toot,
the company of musketeers opposite present arms, and then the music of
the new buglers, and the hoarse, fog-horn-like blasts of the fantastic
tooters on the bala-khanas dies away together in a concerted effort that
would do credit to a troop of wild elephants.

when the noisy trumpeting ceases, the ordinary noises round about seem
like solemn silence in comparison, and above this comparative silence
can be heard the voices of men here and there over the city, calling out
"al-lah-il-all-ah; ali ak-bar." (god is greatest; there is no god but
one god! etc.) with stentorian voices.  the men are perched on the roofs
of the mosques, and on noblemen's walls and houses; the shah has a strong-
voiced muezzin that can be heard above all the others.  the sun has just
set; i can see the snowy cone of mount demavend, peeping apparently over
the high barrack walls; it has just taken on a distinctive roseate tint,
as it oftentimes does at sunset; the reason whereof becomes at once
apparent upon turning toward the west, for the whole western sky is aglow
with a gorgeous sunset-a sunset that paints the horizon a blood red, and
spreads a warm, rich glow over half the heavens.

the moon will be full to-night, and a far lovelier picture even than the
glorious sunset and the rose-tinted mountain, awaits anyone curious
enough to come out-doors and look.  the persian moonlight seems capable
of surrounding the most commonplace objects with a halo of beauty, and
of blending things that are nothing in themselves, into scenes of such
transcendental loveliness that the mere casual contemplation of them
sends a thrill of pleasure coursing through the system.  there is no city
of the same size (180,000) in england or america, but can boast of
buildings infinitely superior to anything in teheran; what trees there
are in and about the city are nothing compared to what we are used to
having about us; and although the gates with their short minars and their
gaudy facings are certainly unique, they suffer greatly from a close
investigation.  nevertheless, persons happening for the first time in the
vicinity of one of these gates on a calm moonlight night, and perchance
descrying "fair luna "through one of the arches or between the minars,
will most likely find themselves transfixed with astonishment at the
marvellous beauty of the scene presented.  by repairing to the artillery
square, or to the short street between the square and the palace front,
on a moonlight night, one can experience a new sense of nature's loveliness;
the soft, chastening light of the persian moon converts the gaudy gates,
the dead mud-walls, the spraggling trees, and the background of snowy
mountains nine miles away, into a picture that will photograph itself
on one's memory forever.  on the way home i meet one of the lady missionaries -
which reminds me that i ought to mention something about the peculiar
position of a ferenghi lady in these mohammedan countries, where it is
considered highly improper for a woman to expose her face in public.  the
persian lady on the streets is enveloped in a shroud-like garment that
transforms her into a shapeless and ungraceful-looking bundle of dark-blue
cotton stuff.  this garment covers head and everything except the face;
over the face is worn a white veil of ordinary sheeting, and opposite
the eyes is inserted an oblong peep-hole of open needle-work, resembling
a piece of perforated card-board.  not even a glimpse of the eye is
visible, unless the lady happens to be handsome and coquettishly inclined;
she will then manage to grant you a momentary peep at her face; but a
wise and discreet persian lady wouldn't let you see her face on the
street - no, not for worlds and worlds!

the european lady with her uncovered face is a conundrum and an object
of intense curiosity, even in teheran at the present day; and in provincial
cities, the wife of the lone consul or telegraph employee finds it highly
convenient to adopt the native costume, face-covering included, when
venturing abroad.  here, in the capital, the wives and daughters of foreign
ministers, european officers and telegraphists, have made uncovered
female faces tolerably familiar to the natives; but they cannot quite
understand but that there is something highly indecorous about it, and
the more unenlightened persians doubtless regard them as quite bold and
forward creatures.  armenian women conceal their faces almost as completely
as do the persian, when they walk abroad; by so doing they avoid unpleasant
criticism, and the rude, inquisitive gaze of the persian men.  although
the persian readily recognizes the fact that a sahib's wife or sister
must be a superior person to an armenian female, she is as much an object
of interest to him when she appears with her face uncovered on the street,
as his own wives in their highly sensational in-door costumes would be
to some of us.  in order to establish herself in the estimation of the
average persian, as all that a woman ought to be, the european lady would
have to conceal her face and cover her shapely, tight-fitting dress with
an inelegant, loose mantle, whenever she ventured outside her own doors.
with something of a penchant for undertaking things never before
accomplished, i proposed one morning to take a walk around the ramparts
that encompass the persian capital.  the question arose as to the distance.
ali akbar, the head fan-ash, said it was six farsakhs (about twenty-four
miles); meshedi ab-dul said it was more.  from the well-known persian
characteristic of exaggerating things, we concluded from this that perhaps
it might be fifteen miles; and on this basis mr. meyrick, of the indo-
european telegraph staff, agreed to bear me company.  the ramparts consist
of the earth excavated from a ditch some forty feet wide by twenty deep,
banked up on the inner side of the ditch; and on top of this bank it is
our purpose to encompass the city.

eight o'clock on the appointed morning finds us on the ramparts at the
gulaek gate, on the north side of the city.  a cold breeze is blowing off
the snowy mountains to the northeast, and we decide to commence our novel
walk toward the west.  following the zigzag configuration of the ramparts,
we find it at first somewhat rough and stony to the feet; on our right
we look down into the broad ditch, and beyond, over the sloping plain,
our eyes follow the long, even rows of kanaat mounds stretching away to
the rolling foothills; towering skyward in the background, but eight
miles away, are the snowy masses of the elburz range.  forty miles away,
at our back, the conical peak of demavend peeps, white, spectral, and
cold, above a bank of snow-clouds that are piled motionless against its
giant sides, as though walling it completely off from the lower world.
on our left lies the city, a curious conglomeration of dead mud-walls,
flat-roofed houses, and poplar-peopled gardens.  a thin haze of smoke
hovers immediately above the streets, through which are visible the
minarets and domes of the mosques, the square, illumined towers of the
shah's anderoon, the monster skeleton dome of the canvas theatre, beneath
which the shah gives once a year the royal tazzia (representation of the
tragedy of "hussein and hassan"), and the tall chimney of the arsenal,
from which a column of black smoke is issuing.  away in the distance, far
beyond the confines of the city, to the southward, glittering like a
mirror in the morning sun, is seen the dome of the great mosque at
shahabdullahzeen, said to be roofed with plates of pure gold.  as we pass
by we can see inside the walls of the english legation grounds; a
magnificent garden of shady avenues, asphalt walks, and dark-green banks
of english ivy that trail over the ground and climb half-way up the
trunks of the trees.  a square-turreted clock-tower and a building that
resembles some old ancestral manor, imparts to "the finest piece of
property in teheran" a home-like appearance; the representative of her
majesty's government, separated from the outer world by a twenty-four-foot
brick wall, might well imagine himself within an hour's ride of london.

beyond the third gate, the character of the soil changes from the stone-
strewn gravel of the northern side, to red stoneless earth, and both
inside and outside the ramparts fields of winter wheat and hardy vegetables
form a refreshing relief from the barren character of the surface
generally.  the ispahan gate, on the southern side, appears the busiest
and most important entrance to the city; by this gate enter the caravans
from bushire, bringing english goods, from bagdad, ispahan, tezd, and
all the cities of the southern provinces.  numbers of caravans are camped
in the vicinity of the gate, completing their arrangements for entering
the city or departing for some distant commercial centre; many of the
waiting camels arc kneeling beneath their heavy loads and quietly feeding.
they are kneeling in small, compact circles, a dozen camels in a circle
with their heads facing inward.  in the centre is placed a pile of chopped
straw; as each camel ducks his head and takes a mouthful, and then
elevates his head again while munching it with great gusto, wearing
meanwhile an expression of intense satisfaction mingled with timidity,
as though he thinks the enjoyment too good to last long, they look as
cosey and fussy as a gathering of puritanical grand-dames drinking tea
and gossiping over the latest news.  within a mile of the ispahan gate
are two other gates, and between them is an area devoted entirely to the
brick-making industry.  here among the clay-pits and abandoned kilns we
obtain a momentary glimpse of a jackal, drinking from a ditch.  he slinks
off out of sight among the caves and ruins, as though conscious of acting
an ungenerous part in seeking his living in a city already full of gaunt,
half-starved pariahs, who pass their lives in wandering listlessly and
hungrily about for stray morsels of offal.  several of these pariahs have
been so unfortunate as to get down into the rampart ditch; we can see
the places where they have repeatedly made frantic rushes for liberty
up the almost perpendicular escarp, only to fall helplessly back to the
bottom of their roofless dungeon, where they will gradually starve to
death.  the natives down in this part of the city greet us with curious
looks; they are wondering at the sight of two ferenghis promenading the
ramparts, far away from the european quarter; we can hear them making
remarks to that effect, and calling one another's attention.  the sun
gets warm, although it is january, as we pass the doshan tepe and the
meshed gates, remarking as we go past that the shah's summer palace on
the hill to the east compares favorably in whiteness with the snow on
the neighboring mountains.  as we again reach the gulaek gate and descend
from the ramparts at the place we started, the clock in the english
legation tower strikes twelve.

"how many miles do you call it." asks my companion.  "just about twelve
miles," i reply; "what do you make it?" "that's about it," he agrees;
"twelve miles round, and eleven gates.  we have walked or climbed over
the archway of eight of the gates; and at the other three we had to climb
off the ramparts and on again." as far as can be learned, this is the
first time any ferenghi has walked clear around the ramparts of teheran.
it is nothing worth boasting about; only a little tramp of a dozen miles,
and there is little of anything new to be seen.  all around the outside
is the level plain, verdureless, except an occasional cultivated field,
and the orchards of the tributary villages scattered here and there.  in
certain quarters of teheran one happens across a few remaining families
of guebres, or fire-worshippers; remnant representatives of the ancient
parsee religion, whose devotees bestowed their strange devotional offerings
upon the fires whose devouring flames they constantly fed, and never
allowed to be extinguished.  these people are interesting as having kept
their heads above the overwhelming flood of mohammedanism that swept
over their country, and clung to their ancient belief through thick and
thin - or, at all events, to have steadfastly refused to embrace any other.
little evidence of their religion remains in persia at the present day,
except their "towers of silence" and the ruins of their old fire-temples.
these latter were built chiefly of soft adobe bricks, and after the lapse
of centuries, are nothing more than shapeless reminders of the past.  a
few miles southeast of teheran, in a desolate, unfrequented spot, is the
guebre "tower of silence," where they dispose of their dead.  on top of
the tower is a kind of balcony with an open grated floor; on this the
naked corpses are placed until the carrion crows and the vultures pick
the skeleton perfectly clean; the dry bones are then cast into a common
receptacle in the tower.  the guebre communities of persia are too
impecunious or too indifferent to keep up the ever-burning-fires nowadays;
the fires of zoroaster, which in olden and more prosperous times were
fed with fuel night and day, are now extinguished forever, and the
scattering survivors of this ancient form of worship form a unique item
in the sum total of the population of persia.

the head-quarters - if they can be said to have any head-quarters - of the
persian guebres are at yezd, a city that is but little known to europeans,
and which is all but isolated from the remainder of the country by the
great central desert.  one great result of this geographical isolation
is to be observed to-day, in the fact that the guebres of yezd held their
own against the unsparing sword of islam better than they did in more
accessible quarters; consequently they are found in greater numbers there
now than in other persian cities.  curiously enough, the chief occupation -
one might say the sole occupation - of the guebres throughout persia, is
taking care of the suburban gardens and premises of wealthy people.  for
this purpose i am told guebre families are in such demand, that if they were
sufficiently numerous to go around, there would be scarcely a piece of
valuable garden property in all persia without a family of guebres in
charge of it.  they are said to be far more honest and trustworthy than
the persians, who, as shiite mohammedans, consider themselves the holiest
people on earth; or the armenians, who hug the flattering unction of
being christians and not mohammedans to their souls, and expect all
christendom to regard them benignly on that account.  it is doubtless
owing to this invaluable trait of their character, that the guebres have
naturally drifted to their level of guardians over the private property
of their wealthy neighbors.

the costume of the guebre female consists of turkish trousers with very
loose, baggy legs, the material of which is usually calico print, and a
mantle of similar material is wrapped about the head and body.  unlike
her mohammedan neighbor, she 'makes no pretence of concealing her features;
her face is usually a picture of pleasantness and good-nature rather
than strikingly handsome or passively beautiful, as is the face of the
persian or armenian belle.  the costume of the men differs but little
from the ordinary costume of the lower-class persians.  like all the
people in these mohammedan countries, who realize the weakness of their
position as a small body among a fanatical population, the teheran guebres
have long been accustomed to consider themselves as under the protecting
shadow of the english legation; whenever they meet a "sahib" on the
street, they seem to expect a nod of recognition.

among the people who awaken special interest in europeans here, may be
mentioned ayoob khan, and his little retinue of attendants, who may be
seen on the streets almost any day.  ayoob khan is in exile here at teheran
in accordance with some mutual arrangement between the english and persian
governments.  on almost any afternoon, about four o'clock, he may be met
with riding a fine, large chestnut stallion, accompanied by another
afghan on an iron gray.  i have never seen them riding faster than a walk,
and they are almost always accompanied by four foot-runners, also afghans,
two of whom walk behind their chieftain and two before.  these runners
carry stout staves with which to warn off mendicants, and with a view
to making it uncomfortable for any irrepressible persian rowdy who should
offer any insults.  both ayoob khan and his attendants retain their
national costume, the main distinguishing features being a huge turban
with about two feet of the broad band left dangling down behind; besides
this, they wear white cotton pantalettes even in mid-winter.  they wear
european shoes and overcoats, as though they had profited by their
intercourse with anglo-indians to the extent of at least shoes and coat.
the foot-runners have their legs below the knee bound tightly with strips
of dark felt.  judging from outward appearances, ayoob khan wears his
exile lightly, for his rotund countenance looks pleasant always, and i
have never yet met him when he was not chatting gayly with his companion.
of the interesting scenes and characters to be seen every day on the
streets of teheran, their name is legion.  the peregrinating tchai-venders,
who, with their little cabinet of tea and sugar in one hand, and samovar
with live charcoals in the other, wander about the city picking up stray
customers, for whom they are prepared to make a glass of hot tea at one
minute's notice; the scores of weird-looking mendicants and dervishes
with their highly fantastic costumes, assailing you with " huk, yah huk,"
the barbers shaving the heads of their customers on the public streets -
shaving their pates clean, save little tufts to enable mohammed to pull
them up to paradise; and many others the description and enumeration of
which would, of themselves, fill a good-sized volume.