



produced by michelle shephard, tiffany vergon, charles aldarondo,
charles franks and the online distributed proofreading team.




the
pocket university
volume xxiii

the guide to
reading

edited by
dr. lyman abbott,
asa don dickinson
and others




contents


books for study and reading
by lyman abbott

the purpose of reading
by john macy

how to get the best out of books
by richard le gallienne

the guide to daily reading
by asa don dickinson

general index of authors

general index of titles




the pocket university
books for study and reading
by lyman abbott


there are three services which books may render in the home: they may
be ornaments, tools, or friends.

i was told a few years ago the following story which is worth retelling
as an illustration of the use of books as ornaments. a millionaire who
had one house in the city, one in the mountains, and one in the south,
wished to build a fourth house on the seashore. a house ought to have a
library. therefore this new house was to have a library. when the house
was finished he found the library shelves had been made so shallow that
they would not take books of an ordinary size. his architect proposed
to change the bookshelves. the millionaire did not wish the change
made, but told his architect to buy fine bindings of classical books
and glue them into the shelves. the architect on making inquiries
discovered that the bindings would cost more than slightly shop-worn
editions of the books themselves. so the books were bought, cut in two
from top to bottom about in the middle, one half thrown away, and the
other half replaced upon the shelves that the handsome backs presented
the same appearance they would have presented if the entire book had
been there. then the glass doors were locked, the key to the glass
doors lost, and sofas and chairs and tables put against them. thus the
millionaire has his library furnished with handsome bindings and these
i may add are quite adequate for all the use which he wishes to make of
them.

this is a rather extreme case of the use of books as ornaments, but it
illustrates in a bizarre way what is a not uncommon use. there is this
to be said for that illiterate millionaire: well-bound books are
excellent ornaments. no decoration with wall paper or fresco can make a
parlor as attractive as it can be made with low bookshelves filled with
works of standard authors and leaving room above for statuary, or
pictures, or the inexpensive decoration of flowers picked from one's
own garden. i am inclined to think that the most attractive parlor i
have ever visited is that of a bookish friend whose walls are thus
furnished with what not only delights the eye, but silently invites the
mind to an inspiring companionship.

more important practically than their use as ornaments is the use of
books as tools. every professional man needs his special tools--the
lawyer his law books, the doctor his medical books, the minister his
theological treatises and his biblical helps. i can always tell when i
go into a clergyman's study by looking at his books whether he is
living in the twentieth century or in the eighteenth. tools do not make
the man, but they make his work and so show what the man is.

every home ought to have some books that are tools and the children
should be taught how to use them. there should be at least an atlas, a
dictionary, and an encyclopadia. if in the evening when the family talk
about the war in the balkans the father gets out the atlas and the
children look to see where roumania and bulgaria and greece and
constantinople and the dardanelles are on the map, they will learn more
of real geography in half an hour than they will learn in a week of
school study concerning countries in which they have no interest. when
there is reading aloud in the family circle, if every unfamiliar word
is looked up in a dictionary, which should always lie easily accessible
upon the table, they will get unconsciously a widening of their
vocabulary and a knowledge of the use of english which will be an
invaluable supplement to the work of their teacher of english in the
school. as to cyclopadias they are of all sizes from the little six-
volumed cyclopadia in the everyman's library to the twenty-nine volumed
encyclopadia britannica, and from the general cyclopadia with more or
less full information on every conceivable topic to the more
distinctive family cyclopadia which covers the life of the household.
where there are children in the family the cyclopadia which covers the
field they are most apt to be interested in--such as "the library of
work & play" or "the guide series" to biography, music, pictures, etc.
--is the best one to begin with. after they have learned to go to it for
information which they want, they will desire a more general cyclopadia
because their wants have increased and broadened.

so much for books as ornaments and as tools. certainly not less
important, if comparisons can be made i am inclined to say more
important, is their usefulness as friends.

in smith college this distinction is marked by the college authorities
in an interesting and valuable manner. in the library building there is
a room for study. it is furnished with a number of plain oak or walnut
tables and with chairs which do not invite to repose. there are
librarians present to get from the stacks the special books which the
student needs. the room is barren of ornament. each student is hard at
--work examining, comparing, collating. she is to be called on to-morrow
in class to tell what she has learned, or next week to hand in a thesis
the product of her study. all eyes are intent upon the allotted task;
no one looks up to see you when you enter. in the same building is
another room which i will call the lounge, though i think it bears a
different name. the books are upon shelves around the wall and all are
within easy reach. many of them are fine editions. a wood fire is
burning in the great fireplace. the room is furnished with sofas and
easy chairs. no one is at work. no one is talking. no! but they are
listening--listening to authors whose voices have long since been
silent in death.

in every home there ought to be books that are friends. in every day,
at least in every week, there ought to be some time which can be spent
in cultivating their friendship. this is reading, and reading is very
different from study.

the student has been at work all the morning with his tools. he has
been studying a question of constitutional law: what are the powers of
the president of the united states? he has examined the constitution;
then willoughby or watson on the constitution; then he turns to the
federalist; then perhaps to the constitutional debates, or to the
histories, such as von holst's constitutional history of the united
states, or to treatises, such as bryce's american commonwealth. he
compares the different opinions, weighs them, deliberates, endeavors to
reach a decision. wearied with his morning pursuit of truth through a
maze of conflicting theories, he puts his tools by and goes to dinner.
in the evening he sits down in the same library for an hour with his
friends. he selects his friend according to his mood. macaulay carries
him back across the centuries and he lives for an hour with the
puritans or with dr. samuel johnson. carlyle carries him unharmed for
an hour through the exciting scenes of the french revolution; or he
chuckles over the caustic humor of thackeray's semi-caricatures of
english snobs. with jonathan swift as a guide he travels with gulliver
into no-man's land and visits lilliput or brobdingnag; or oliver
goldsmith enables him to forget the strenuous life of america by taking
him to "the deserted village." he joins charles lamb's friends, listens
to the prose-poet's reveries on dream-children, then closes his eyes
and falls into a reverie of his own childhood days; or he spends an
hour with tennyson, charmed by his always musical but not often virile
verse, or with browning, inspired by his always virile but often rugged
verse, or with milton or dante, and forgets this world altogether, with
its problems and perplexities, convoyed to another realm by these
spiritual guides; or he turns to the autobiography of one of the great
men of the past, telling of his achievements, revealing his doubts and
difficulties, his self-conflicts and self-victories, and so inspiring
the reader to make his own life sublime. or one of the great scientists
may interpret to him the wonders of nature and thrill him with the
achievements of man in solving some of the riddles of the universe and
winning successive mastery over its splendid forces.

it is true that no dead thing is equal to a living person. the one
afternoon i spent in john g. whittier's home, the one dinner i took
with professor tyndall in his london home, the one half hour which
herbert spencer gave to me at his club, mean more to me than any equal
time spent in reading the writings of either one of them. these
occasions of personal fellowship abide in the memory as long as life
lasts. this i say with emphasis that what i say next may not be
misunderstood--that there is one respect in which the book is the best
of possible friends. you do not need to decide beforehand what friend
you will invite to spend the evening with you. when supper is over and
you sit down by the evening lamp for your hour of companionship, you
give your invitation according to your inclination at the time. and if
you have made a mistake, and the friend you have invited is not the one
you want to talk to, you can "shut him up" and not hurt his feelings.
remarkable is the friend who speaks only when you want to listen and
can keep silence when you want silence. who is there who has not been
sometimes bored by a good friend who went on talking when you wanted to
reflect on what he had already said? who is there who has not had his
patience well nigh exhausted at times by a friend whose enthusiasm for
his theme appeared to be quite inexhaustible? a book never bores you
because you can always lay it down before it becomes a bore.

most families can do with a few books that are tools. in these days in
which there is a library in almost every village, the family that has
an atlas, a dictionary, and a cyclopadia can look to the public library
for such other tools as are necessary. and we can depend on the library
or the book club for books that are mere acquaintances--the current
book about current events, the books that are read to-day and forgotten
to-morrow, leaving only a residuum in our memory, the book that, once
read, we never expect to read again. in my own home this current
literature is either borrowed and returned or, if purchased, as soon as
it has been used is passed along to neighbors or to the village
library. its room is better than its company on my over-crowded book
shelves.

but books that are friends ought to abide in the home. the very form of
the book grows familiar; a different edition, even a different copy,
does not quite serve the same friendly purpose. if the reader is wise
he talks to his friend as well as listens to him and adds in pencil
notes, in the margin or on the back pages of the book, his own
reflections. i take up these books marked with the indications of my
conversation with my friend and in these pencilled memoranda find an
added value. sometimes the mark emphasizes an agreement between my
friend and me, sometimes it emphasizes a disagreement, and sometimes it
indicates the progress in thought i have made since last we met. a
wisely marked book is sometimes doubled in value by the marking.

before i bring this essay to a close, already lengthened beyond my
predetermined limits, i venture to add four rules which may be of value
at least to the casual reader.

for reading, select the book which suits your inclination. in study it
is wise to make your will command your mind and go on with your task
however unattractive it may prove to you. you may be a hamiltonian, and
jefferson's views of the constitution may repel you, or even bore you.
no matter. go on. scholarship requires persistence in study of matter
that repels or even bores the student. you may be a devout believer and
herbert spencer repellent. nevertheless, if you are studying you may
need to master herbert spencer. but if you are reading, read what
interests you. if scott does not interest you and dickens does, drop
scott and read dickens. you need not be any one's enemy; but you need
not be a friend with everybody. this is as true of books as of persons.
for friendship some agreement in temperament is quite essential.

henry ward beecher's application of this principle struck me as
interesting and unique. he did a great deal of his reading on the train
in his lecture tours. his invariable companion was a black bag and the
black bag always contained some books. as i am writing from
recollection of a conversation with him some sixty years ago my
statement may lack in accuracy of detail, but not, i think, in
essential veracity. he selected in the beginning of the year some four
departments of reading, such as poetry, history, philosophy, fiction,
and in each department a specific course, such as greek poetry,
macaulay's history, spencer's philosophy, scott's novels. then he read
according to his mood, but generally in the selected course: if poetry,
the greek poets; if history, macaulay; if philosophy, spencer; if
fiction, scott. this gave at once liberty to his mood and unity to his
reading.

one may read either for acquisition or for inspiration. a gentleman who
has acquired a national reputation as a popular lecturer and preacher,
formed the habit, when in college, of always subjecting himself to a
recitation in all his serious reading. after finishing a chapter he
would close the book and see how much of what he had read he could
recall. one consequence is the development of a quite marvelous memory,
the results of which are seen in frequent and felicitous references in
his public speaking to literature both ancient and modern.

he who reads for inspiration pursues a different course. if as he
reads, a thought expressed by his author starts a train of thought in
his own mind, he lays down his book and follows his thought wherever it
may lead him. he endeavors to remember, not the thought which the
author has  recorded, but the unrecorded thought which the author has
stimulated in his own mind. reading is to him not an acquisition but a
ferment. i imagine from my acquaintance with phillips brooks and with
his writings that this was his  method.

i have a friend who says that he prefers to select his authors for
himself, not to have them selected for him. but he has money with which
to buy the books he wants, a room in which to put them, and the broad
culture which enables him to make a wise selection. most of us lack one
at least of these qualifications: the money, the space, or the
knowledge. for most of us a library for the home, selected as this
pocket library has been has three great advantages: the cost is not
prohibitive; the space can easily be made in out home for the books;
and the selection is more wisely made than any we could make for
ourselves. for myself i should be very glad to have the editors of this
series come into my library, which is fairly large but sadly needs
weeding out, give me a literary appraisal of my books, and tell me what
volumes in their respective departments they think i could best
dispense with to make room for their betters, and what their betters
would be.

to these considerations in favor of such a home library as this, may be
added the fact that the books are of such a size that one can easily
put a volume in his pocket when he is going on a train or in a trolley
car. for busy men and women often the only time for reading is the time
which too many of us are apt to waste in doing nothing.

perhaps the highest use of good books is their use as friends. such a
wisely selected group of friends as this library furnishes is an
invaluable addition to any home which receives it and knows how to make
wise use of it. i am glad to have the privilege of introducing it and
hope that this introduction may add to the number of homes in which it
will find a welcome.




the purpose of reading

by john macy


why do we read books is one of those vast questions that need no
answer. as well ask, why ought we to be good? or, why do we believe in
a god? the whole universe of wisdom answers. to attempt an answer in a
single article would be like turning a spyglass for a moment toward the
stars. we take the great simple things for granted, like the air we
breathe. in a country that holds popular education to be the foundation
of all its liberties and fortunes, we do not find many people who need
to be argued into the belief that the reading of books is good for us;
even people who do not read much acknowledge vaguely that they ought to
read more.

there are, to be sure, men of rough worldly wisdom, even endowed with
spiritual insight, who distrust "book learning" and fall back on the
obvious truth that experience of life is the great teacher. such
persons are in a measure justified in their conviction by the number of
unwise human beings who have read much but to no purpose.

the bookful blockhead, ignorantly read,
with loads of learned lumber in his head

is a living argument against mere reading. but we can meet such
argument by pointing out that the blockhead who cannot learn from books
cannot learn much from life, either. that sometimes useful citizen whom
it is fashionable to call a philistine, and who calls himself a
"practical man," often has under him a beginner fresh from the schools,
who is glib and confident in repeating bookish theories, but is not yet
skillful in applying them. if the practical man is thoughtless, he
sniffs at theory and points to his clumsy assistant as proof of the
uselessness of what is to be got from books. if he is wise, the
practical man realizes how much better off he would be, how much
farther his hard work and experience might have carried him, if he had
had the advantage of bookish training.

moreover, the hard-headed skeptic, self-made and self-secure, who will
not traffic with the literature that touches his life work, is seldom
so confined to his own little shop that he will not, for recreation,
take holiday tours into the literature of other men's lives and labors.
the man who does not like to read any books is, i am confident, seldom
found, and at the risk of slandering a patriot, i will express the
doubt whether he is a good citizen. honest he may be, but certainly not
wise. the human race for thousands of years has been writing its
experiences, telling how it has met our everlasting problems, how it
has struggled with darkness and rejoiced in light. what fools we should
be to try to live our lives without the guidance and inspiration of the
generations that have gone before, without the joy, encouragement, and
sympathy that the best imaginations of our generation are distilling
into words. for literature is simply life selected and condensed into
books. in a few hours we can follow all that is recorded of the life of
jesus--the best that he did in years of teaching and suffering all ours
for a day of reading, and the more deeply ours for a lifetime of
reading and meditation!

if the expression of life in words is strong and beautiful and true it
outlives empires, like the oldest books of the old testament. if it is
weak or trivial or untrue, it is forgotten like most of the "stories"
in yesterday's newspaper, like most of the novels of last year. the
expression of truth, the transmission of knowledge and emotions between
man and man from generation to generation, these are the purposes of
literature. not to read books is like being shut up in a dungeon while
life rushes by outside.

i happen to be writing in christmas week, and i have read for the tenth
time "a christmas carol," by dickens, that amazing allegory in which
the hard, bitter facts of life are involved in a beautiful myth, that
wizard's caldron in which humor bubbles and from which rise phantom
figures of religion and poetry. can any one doubt that if this story
were read by every man, woman, and child in the world, christmas would
be a happier time and the feelings of the race elevated and
strengthened? the story has power enough to defeat armies, to make
revolutions in the faith of men, and turn the cold markets of the world
into festival scenes of charity. if you know any mean person you may be
sure that he has not read "a christmas carol," or that he read it long
ago and has forgotten it. i know there are persons who pretend that the
sentimentality of dickens destroys their interest in him. i once took a
course with an over-refined, imperfectly educated professor of
literature, who advised me that in time i should outgrow my liking for
dickens. it was only his way of recommending to me a kind of fiction
that i had not learned to like. in time i did learn to like it, but i
did not outgrow dickens. a person who can read "a christmas carol"
aloud to the end and keep his voice steady is, i suspect, not a safe
person to trust with one's purse or one's honor.

it is not necessary to argue about the value of literature or even to
define it. one way of bringing ourselves to realize vividly what
literature can do for us is to enter the libraries of great men and see
what books have done for the acknowledged leaders of our race.

you will recall john stuart mill's experience in reading wordsworth.
mill was a man of letters as well as a scientific economist and
philosopher, and we expect to find that men of letters have been
nourished on literature; reading must necessarily have been a large
part of their professional preparation. the examples of men of action
who have been molded and inspired by books will perhaps be more helpful
to remember; for most of us are not to be writers or to engage in
purely intellectual work; our ambitions point to a thousand different
careers in the world of action.

lincoln was not primarily a man of letters, although he wrote noble
prose on occasion, and the art of expression was important, perhaps
indispensable, in his political success. he read deeply in the law and
in books on public questions. for general literature he had little
time, either during his early struggles or after his public life began,
and his autobiographical memorandum contains the significant words:
"education defective." but these more significant words are found in a
letter which he wrote to hackett, the player: "some of shakespeare's
plays i have never read, while others i have gone over perhaps as
frequently as any unprofessional reader. among the latter are 'lear,'
'richard iii,' 'henry viii,' 'hamlet,' and, especially, 'macbeth.'"

if he had not read these masterpieces, no doubt he would have become
president just the same and guided the country through its terrible
difficulties; but we may be fairly sure that the high philosophy by
which he lifted the political differences of his day above partisan
quarrels, the command of words which gives his letters and speeches
literary permanence apart from their biographical interest, the poetic
exaltation of the gettysburg address, these higher qualities of genius,
beyond the endowment of any native wit, came to lincoln in some part
from the reading of books. it is important to note that he followed
franklin's advice to read much but not too many books; the list of
books mentioned in the biographical records of lincoln is not long. but
he went over those half dozen plays "frequently." we should remember,
too, that he based his ideals upon the bible and his style upon the
king james version. his writings abound in biblical phrases.

we are accustomed to regard lincoln as a thinker. his right arm in the
saddest duty of his life, general grant, was a man of deeds; as lincoln
said of him, he was a "copious worker and fighter, but a very meager
writer and telegrapher." in his "memoirs," grant makes a modest
confession about his reading:

"there is a fine library connected with the academy [west point] from
which cadets can get books to read in their quarters. i devoted more
time to these than to books relating to the course of studies. much of
the time, i am sorry to say, was devoted to novels, but not those of a
trashy sort. i read all of bulwer's then published, cooper's,
marryat's, scott's, washington irving's works, lever's, and many others
that i do not now remember."

grant was not a shining light in his school days, nor indeed in his
life until the civil war, and at first sight he is not a striking
example of a great man influenced by books. yet who can deny that the
fruit of that early reading is to be found in his "memoirs," in which a
man of action, unused to writing, and called upon to narrate great
events, discovers an easy adequate style? there is a dangerous kind of
conjecture in which many biographers indulge when they try to relate
logically the scattered events of a man's life. a conjectured relation
is set down as a proved or unquestioned relation. i have said something
about this in [footnote: see john macy's guide to reading, chapter
viii.]  writing on biography, and i do not wish to violate my own
teachings. but we may, without harm, hazard the suggestion, which is
only a suggestion, that some of the chivalry of scott's heroes wove
itself into grant's instincts and inspired this businesslike, modern
general, in the days when politeness has lost some of its flourish, to
be the great gentleman he was at appomattox when he quietly wrote into
the terms of the surrender that the confederate officers should keep
their side arms. stevenson's account of the episode in his essay on
"gentlemen" is heightened, though not above the dignity of the facts,
certainly not to a degree that is untrue to the facts, as they are to
be read in grant's simple narrative. since i have agreed not to say
"ought to read," i will only express the hope that the quotation from
stevenson will lead you to the essay and to the volume that contains
it.

"on the day of the capitulation, lee wore his presentation sword; it
was the first thing that grant observed, and from that moment he had
but one thought: how to avoid taking it. a man, who should perhaps have
had the nature of an angel, but assuredly not the special virtues of a
gentleman, might have received the sword, and no more words about it;
he would have done well in a plain way. one who wished to be a
gentleman, and knew not how, might have received and returned it: he
would have done infamously ill, he would have proved himself a cad;
taking the stage for himself, leaving to his adversary confusion of
countenance and the ungraceful posture of a man condemned to offer
thanks. grant without a word said, added to the terms this article:
'all officers to retain their side arms'; and the problem was solved
and lee kept his sword, and grant went down to posterity, not perhaps a
fine gentleman, but a great one."

napoleon, who of all men of mighty deeds after julius caesar had the
greatest intellect, was a tireless reader, and since he needed only
four or five hours' sleep in twenty-four he found time to read in the
midst of his prodigious activities. nowadays those of us who are
preparing to conquer the world are taught to strengthen ourselves for
the task by getting plenty of sleep. napoleon's devouring eyes read far
into the night; when he was in the field his secretaries forwarded a
stream of books to his headquarters; and if he was left without a new
volume to begin, some underling had to bear his imperial displeasure.
no wonder that his brain contained so many ideas that, as the sharp-
tongued poet, heine, said, one of his lesser thoughts would keep all
the scholars and professors in germany busy all their lives making
commentaries on it.

in franklin's "autobiography" we have an unusually clear statement of
the debt of a man of affairs to literature: "from a child i was fond of
reading, and all the little money that came into my hands was ever laid
out in books. pleased with the 'pilgrim's progress,' my first
collection was of john bunyan's works in separate little volumes.... my
father's little library consisted chiefly of books on polemic divinity,
most of which i read, and have since often regretted that, at a time
when i had such a thirst for knowledge, more proper books had not
fallen in my way, since it was now resolved that i should not be a
clergyman. 'plutarch's lives' there was in which i read abundantly, and
i still think that time spent to great advantage. there was also a book
of de foe's, called an 'essay on projects,' and another of dr.
mather's, called 'essays to do good,' which perhaps gave me a turn of
thinking that had an influence on some of the principal future events
of my life."

it is not surprising to find that the most versatile of versatile
americans read de foe's "essay on projects," which contains practical
suggestions on a score of subjects, from banking and insurance to
national academics. in cotton mather's "essays to do good" is the germ
perhaps of the sensible morality of franklin's "poor richard." the
story of how franklin pave his nights to the study of addison and by
imitating the spectator papers taught himself to write, is the
best of lessons in self-cultivation in english. the "autobiography" is
proof of how well he learned, not addison's style, which was suited to
joseph addison and not to benjamin franklin, but a clear, firm manner
of writing. in franklin's case we can see not only what he owed to
books, but how one side of his fine, responsive mind was starved
because, as he put it, more proper books did not fall in his way. the
blind side of franklin's great intellect was his lack of religious
imagination. this defect may be accounted for by the forbidding nature
of the religious books in his father's library. repelled by the dull
discourses, the young man missed the religious exaltation and poetic
mysticism which the new england divines concealed in their polemic
argument. franklin's liking for bunyan and his confession that his
father's discouragement kept him from being a poet--"most probably," he
says, "a very bad one"--show that he would have responded to the right
kind of religious literature, and not have remained all his life such a
complacent rationalist.

if it is clear that the purpose of reading is to put ourselves in
communication with the best minds of our race, we need go no farther
for a definition of "good reading." whatever human beings hare said
well is literature, whether it be the declaration of independence or a
love story. reading consists in nothing more than in taking one of the
volumes in which somebody has said something well, opening it on one's
knee, and beginning.

we take it for granted, then, that we know why we read. we may ask one
further question: how shall we read? one answer is that we should read
with as much of ourselves as a book warrants, with the part of
ourselves that a book demands. mrs. browning says:

                        we get no good
             by being ungenerous, even to a book,
             and calculating profits--so much help
             by so much reading. it is rather when
             we gloriously forget ourselves, and plunge
             soul-forward, headlong, into a book's profound,
             impassioned for its beauty, and salt of truth--
             'tis then we get the right good from a book.

we sometimes know exactly what we wish to get from a book, especially
if it is a volume of information on a definite subject. but the great
book is full of treasures that one does not deliberately seek, and
which indeed one may miss altogether on the first journey through. it
is almost nonsensical to say: read macaulay for clearness, carlyle for
power, thackeray for ease. literary excellence is not separated and
bottled up in any such drug-shop array. if macaulay is a master of
clearness it is because he is much else besides. unless we read a man
for all there is in him, we get very little; we meet, not a living
human being, not a vital book, but something dead, dismembered,
disorganized. we do not read thackeray for ease; we read him for
thackeray and enjoy his ease by the way.

we must read a book for all there is in it or we shall get little or
nothing. to be masters of books we must have learned to let books
master us. this is true of books that we are required to read, such as
text-books, and of those we read voluntarily and at leisure. the law of
reading is to give a book its due and a little more. the art of reading
is to know how to apply this law. for there is an art of reading, for
each of us to learn for himself, a private way of making the
acquaintance of books.

macaulay, whose mind was never hurried or confused, learned to read
very rapidly, to absorb a page at a glance. a distinguished professor,
who has spent his life in the most minutely technical scholarship,
surprised us one day by commending to his classes the fine art of
"skipping." many good books, including some most meritorious "three-
decker" novels, have their profitless pages, and it is useful to know
by a kind of practised instinct where to pause and reread and where to
run lightly and rapidly over the page. it is a useful accomplishment
not only in the reading of fiction, but in the business of life, to the
man of affairs who must get the gist of a mass of written matter, and
to the student of any special subject.

usually, of course, a book that is worth reading at all is worth
reading carefully. thoroughness of reading is the first thing to preach
and to practise, and it is perhaps dangerous to suggest to a beginner
that any book should be skimmed. the suggestion will serve its purpose
if it indicates that there are ways to read, that practice in reading
is like practice in anything else; the more one does, and the more
intelligently one does it, the farther and more easily one can go. in
the best reading--that is, the most thoughtful reading of the most
thoughtful books--attention is necessary. it is even necessary that we
should read some works, some passages, so often and with such close
application that we commit them to memory. it is said that the habit of
learning pieces by heart is not so prevalent as it used to be. i hope
that this is not so. what! have you no poems by heart, no great songs,
no verses from the bible, no speeches from shakespeare? then you have
not begun to read, you have not learned how to read.

we have said enough, perhaps, of the theories of reading. the one
lesson that seems most obvious is that we must come close to
literature.




how to get the best out
of books

by richard le gallienne


one is sometimes asked by young people panting after the waterbrooks of
knowledge: "how shall i get the best out of books?" here indeed, is one
of those questions which can be answered only in general terms, with
possible illustrations from one's own personal experience. misgivings,
too, as to one's fitness to answer it may well arise, as wistfully
looking round one's own bookshelves, one asks oneself: "have i myself
got the best out of this wonderful world of books?" it is almost like
asking oneself: "have i got the best out of life?"

as we make the survey, it will surely happen that our eyes fall on many
writers whom the stress of life, or spiritual indolence, has prevented
us from using as all the while they have been eager to be used; friends
we might have made yet never have made, neglected counsellors we would
so often have done well to consult, guides that could have saved us
many a wrong turning in the difficult way. there, in unvisited corners
of our shelves, what neglected fountains of refreshments, gardens in
which we have never walked, hills we have never climbed!

"well," we say with a sigh, "a man cannot read everything; it is life
that has interrupted our studies, and probably the fact is that we have
accumulated more books than we really need." the young reader's
appetite is largely in his eyes, and it is very natural for one who is
born with a taste for books to gather them about him at first
indiscriminately, on the hearsay recommendation of fame, before he
really knows what his own individual tastes are, or are going to be,
and in that wistful survey i have imagined, our eyes will fall, too,
with some amusement, on not a few volumes to which we never have had
any really personal relation, and which, whatever their distinction or
their value for others, were never meant for us. the way to do with
such books is to hand them over to some one who has a use for them. on
our shelves they are like so much good thrown away, invitations to
entertainments for which we have no taste. in all vital libraries, such
a process of progressive refection is continually going on, and to
realize what we do not want in books, or cannot use, must, obviously,
be a first principle in our getting the best out of them.

yes, we read too many books, and too many that, as they do not really
interest us, bring us neither benefit nor diversion. even from the
point of view of reading for pleasure, we manage our reading badly. we
listlessly allow ourselves to be bullied by publishers' advertisements
into reading the latest fatuity in fiction, without, in one case out of
twenty, finding any of that pleasure we are ostensibly seeking.
instead, indeed, we are bored and enervated, where we might have been
refreshed, either by romance or laughter. such reading resembles the
idle absorption of innocuous but interesting beverages, which cheer as
little as they inebriate, and yet at the same time make frivolous
demands on the digestive functions. no one but a publisher could call
such reading "light." actually it is weariness to the flesh and
heaviness to the spirit.

if, therefore, our idea of the best in books is the recreation they can
so well bring; if we go to books as to a playground to forget our cares
and to blow off the cobwebs of business, let us make sure that we find
what we seek. it is there, sure enough. the playgrounds of literature
are indeed wide, and alive with bracing excitement, nor is there any
limit to the variety of the games. but let us be sure, when we set out
to be amused, that we really are amused, that our humorists do really
make us laugh, and that our story-tellers have stories to tell and know
how to tell them. beware of imitations, and, when in doubt, try
shakespeare, and dumas--even ouida. as a rule, avoid the "spring
lists," or "summer reading." "summer reading" is usually very hot work.

hackneyed as it is, there is no better general advice on reading than
shakespeare's--

no profit is where is no pleasure taken,

in brief, sir, study what you most affect.

not only in regard to books whose purpose, frankly, is recreation, but
also in regard to the graver uses of books, this counsel no less holds.
no reading does us any good that is not a pleasure to us. her paths are
paths of pleasantness. yet, of course, this does not mean that all
profitable reading is easy reading. some of the books that give us the
finest pleasure need the closest application for their enjoyment. there
is always a certain spiritual and mental effort necessary to be made
before we tackle the great books. one might compare it to the effort of
getting up to see the sun rise. it is no little tug to leave one's warm
bed--but once we are out in the crystalline morning air, wasn't it
worth it? perhaps our finest pleasure always demands some such
austerity of preparation. that is the secret of the truest
epicureanism. books like dante's "divine comedy," or plato's dialogues,
will not give themselves to a lounging reader. they demand a braced,
attentive spirit. but when the first effort has been made, how
exhilarating are the altitudes in which we find ourselves; what a glow
of pure joy is the reward which we are almost sure to win by our mental
mountaineering.

but such books are not for moments when we are unwilling or unable to
make that necessary effort. we cannot always be in the mood for the
great books, and often we are too tired physically, or too low down on
the depressed levels of daily life, even to lift our eyes toward the
hills. to attempt the great books--or any books at all--in such moods
and moments, is a mistake. we may thus contract a prejudice against
some writer who, approached in more fortunate moments, would prove the
very man we were looking for.

to know when to read is hardly less important than to know what to
read. of course, every one must decide the matter for himself; but one
general counsel may be ventured: read only what you want to read, and
only when you want to read it.

some readers find the early morning, when they have all the world to
themselves, their best time for reading, and, if you are a good
sleeper, and do not find early rising more wearying than refreshing,
there is certainly no other time of the day when the mind is so eagerly
receptive, has so keen an edge of appetite, and absorbs a book in so
fine an intoxication. for your true book-lover there is no other
exhilaration so exquisite as that with which one reads an inspiring
book in the solemn freshness of early morning. one's nerves seem
peculiarly strung for exquisite impressions in the first dewy hours of
the day, there is a virginal sensitiveness and purity about all our
senses, and the mere delight of the eye in the printed page is keener
than at any other time. "the muses love the morning, and that is a fit
time for study," said erasmus to his friend christianus of lubeck; and,
certainly, if early rising agrees with one, there is no better time for
getting the very best out of a book. moreover, morning reading has a
way of casting a spell of peace over the whole day. it has a sweet,
solemnizing effect on our thoughts--a sort of mental matins--and
through the day's business it accompanies us as with hidden music.

there are others who prefer to do their reading at night, and i presume
that most readers of this paper are so circumstanced as to have no time
to spare for reading during the day. personally, i think that one of
the best places to read in is bed. paradoxical as it may sound, one is
not so apt to fall asleep over his book in bed as in the post-prandial
armchair. while one's body rests itself, one's mind, remains alert,
and, when the time for sleep comes at last, it passes into
unconsciousness, tranquilized and sweetened with thought and pleasantly
weary with healthy exercise. one awakens, too, next morning, with, so
to say, a very pleasant taste of meditation in the mouth. erasmus,
again, has a counsel for the bedtime reader, expressed with much
felicity. "a little before you sleep," he says, "read something that is
exquisite, and worth remembering; and contemplate upon it till you fall
asleep; and, when you awake in the morning, call yourself to an account
for it."

in an old atlantic monthly, from which, if i remember aright, he
never rescued it, oliver wendell holmes has a delightful paper on the
delights of reading in bed, entitled "pillow-smoothing authors."

then, though i suppose we shall have the oculists against us, the cars
are good places to read in--if you have the power of detachment, and
are able to switch off your ears from other people's conversation. it
is a good plan to have a book with you in all places and at all times.
most likely you will carry it many a day and never give it a single
look, but, even so, a book in the hand is always a companionable
reminder of that happier world of fancy, which, alas! most of us can
only visit by playing truant from the real world. as some men wear
boutonnieres, so a reader carries a book, and sometimes, when he
is feeling the need of beauty, or the solace of a friend, he opens it,
and finds both. probably he will count among the most fruitful moments
of his reading the snatched glimpses of beauty and wisdom he has caught
in the morning car. the covers of his book have often proved like some
secret door, through which, surreptitiously opened, he has looked for a
moment into his own particular fairy land. never mind the oculist,
therefore, but, whenever you feel like it, read in the car.

one or two technical considerations may be dealt with in this place.
how to remember what one reads is one of them. some people are blest
with such good memories that they never forget anything that they have
once read. literary history has recorded many miraculous memories.
still, it is quite possible to remember too much, and thus turn one's
mind into a lumber-room of useless information. a good reader forgets
even more than he remembers. probably we remember all that is really
necessary for us, and, except in so far as our reading is technical and
directed toward some exact science or, profession, accuracy of memory
is not important. as the sabbath was made for man, so books were made
for the reader, and, when a reader has assimilated from any given book
his own proper nourishment and pleasure, the rest of the book is so
much oyster shell. the end of true reading is the development of
individuality. like a certain water insect, the reader instinctively
selects from the outspread world of books the building materials for
the house of his soul. he chooses here and rejects there, and remembers
or forgets according to the formative desire of his nature. yet it
often happens that he forgets much that he needs to remember, and thus
the question of methodical aids to memory arises.

one's first thought, of course, is of the commonplace book. well, have
you ever kept one, or, to be more accurate, tried to keep one?
personally, i believe in the commonplace book so long as we don't
expect too much from it. its two dangers are (1) that one is apt to
make far too many and too minute entries, and (2) that one is apt to
leave all the remembering to the commonplace book, with a consequent
relaxation of one's own attention. on the other hand, the mere
discipline of a commonplace book is a good thing, and if--as i think is
the best way--we copy out the passages at full length, they are thus
the more securely fixed in the memory. a commonplace book kept with
moderation is really useful, and may be delightful. but the entries
should be made at full length. otherwise, the thing becomes a mere
index, an index which encourages us to forget.

another familiar way of assisting one's memory in reading is to mark
one's own striking passages. this method is chiefly worth while for the
sake of one's second and subsequent readings; though it all depends
when one makes the markings--at what time of his life, i mean. markings
made at the age of twenty years are of little use at thirty--except
negatively. in fact, i have usually found that all i care to read again
of a book read at twenty is just the passages i did not mark. this
consideration, however, does not depreciate the value of one's
comparatively contemporary markings. at the same time, marking, like
indexing, is apt, unless guarded against, to relax the memory. one is
apt to mark a passage in lieu of remembering it. still, for a second
reading, as i say--a second reading not too long after the first--
marking is a useful method, particularly if one regards his first
reading of a book as a prospecting of the ground rather than a taking
possession. one's first reading is a sort of flying visit, during which
he notes the places he would like to visit again and really come to
know. a brief index of one's markings at the end of a volume is a
method of memory that commended itself to the booklovers of former
days--to leigh hunt, for instance.

yet none of these external methods, useful as they may prove, can
compare with a habit of thorough attention. we read far too hurriedly,
too much in the spirit of the "quick lunch." no doubt we do so a great
deal from the misleading idea that there is so very much to read.
actually, there is very little to read,--if we wish for real reading--
and there is time to read it all twice over. we--americans--bolt our
books as we do our food, and so get far too little good out of them. we
treat our mental digestions as brutally as we treat our stomachs.
meditation is the digestion of the mind, but we allow ourselves no time
for meditation. we gorge our eyes with the printed page, but all too
little of what we take in with our eyes ever reaches our minds or our
spirits. we assimilate what we can from all this hurry of superfluous
food, and the rest goes to waste, and, as a natural consequence,
contributes only to the wear and tear of our mental organism.

books should be real things. they were so once, when a man would give a
fat field in exchange for a small manuscript; and they are no less real
to-day--some of them. each age contributes one or two real books to the
eternal library--and always the old books remain, magic springs of
healing and refreshment. if no one should write a book for a thousand
years, there are quite enough books to keep us going. real books there
are in plenty. perhaps there are more real books than there are real
readers. books are the strong tincture of experience. they are to be
taken carefully, drop by drop, not carelessly gulped down by the
bottleful. therefore, if you would get the best out of books, spend a
quarter of an hour in reading, and three-quarters of an hour in
thinking over what you have read.




the guide to daily
reading

prepared by
asa don dickinson


the elaborate, systematic "course of reading" is a bore. after thirty
years spent among books and bookish people i have never yet met anyone
who would admit that he had ploughed through such a course from
beginning to end. of course a few faithful souls, with abundant
leisure, have done this, just as there are men who have walked from new
york city to san francisco. good exercise, doubtless! but most of us
have not time for feats of such questionable utility.

yet i myself and most of the booklovers whom i know have started
at one time or another to pursue a course of reading, and we have never
regretted our attempts. why? because this is an excellent way to
discover the comparatively small number of authors who have a message
that we need to hear. when such an one is discovered, one may with a
good conscience let the systematic course go by the board until one has
absorbed all that is useful from the store of good things offered by
the valuable new acquaintance.

each one has his idiosyncrasies. if i may be permitted to allude to a
personal failing, let me confess that i have never read "paradise lost"
or "pilgrim's progress." i have hopefully dipped into them repeatedly,
but--i don't like them. some day i hope to, but until my mind is
ready for these two great world-books, i do not intend to waste time by
driving through them with set teeth. there are too many other good
books that i do enjoy reading. "in brief, sir, study what you most
affect."

the "guide to daily readings" which follows makes no claim to be
systematic. the aim has been simply to introduce the reader to a goodly
company of authors--to provide a daily flower of thought for the
buttonhole, to-day a glorious rose of poetic fancy, to-morrow a pert
little pansy of quaint humor.

yet nearly all the selections are doubly significant and interesting if
read upon the days to which they are especially assigned. for example,
on new year's day it is suggested that one set one's house in order by
reading franklin's "rules of conduct," longfellow's "psalm of life,"
bryant's "thanatopsis," and lowell's "to the future"; on january 19th,
poe's birthday, one is directed to an excellent sketch of poe and to
typical examples of his best work, "the raven" and "the cask of
amontillado"; and on october 31st, hallowe'en, one is reminded of
burns's "tam o'shanter" and irving's "legend of sleepy hollow."

the references are explicit in each case, so that it is a matter of
only a few seconds to find each one. for example, the reference to the
"cask of amontillado" is 4-pt. i =67-77; which means that this tale is
ten pages long and will be found in part i of volume 4, at page 67.
excepting volumes 10-15 (poetry), two volumes are bound in one in this
set, so it should be remembered that generally there are two pages
numbered 67 in each book.

the daily selections can in most cases be read in from fifteen minutes
to half an hour, and dr. eliot, president emeritus of harvard, has said
that fifteen minutes a day devoted to good literature will give every
man the essentials of a liberal education. if time can be found between
breakfast and the work-hours for these few minutes of reading, one will
receive more benefit than if it is done during the somnolent period
which follows the day's work and dinner. it is a mistake, however, to
read before breakfast. eyes and stomach are too closely related
to permit of this.

happy is he who can read these books in company with a sympathetic
companion. his enjoyment of the treasure they contain will be doubled.

one final hint--when reading for something besides pastime, get in the
habit of referring when necessary to dictionary, encyclopadia, and
atlas. if on the subway or a railway train, jot down a memorandum of
the query on the flyleaf, and look up the answer at the first
opportunity.

asa don dickinson.




there is no business, no avocation whatever, which will not permit a
man, who has the inclination, to give a little time, every day, to study.
                             --daniel wyttenbach.