



this ebook was produced by david widger  [widger@cecomet.net]





                        narrative and legendary

                                 poems

                                   by
                        john greenleaf whittier





the bridal of pennacook
     i.    the merrimac
     ii.   the bashaba
     iii.  the daughter
     iv.   the wedding
     v.    the new home
     vi.   at pennacook
     vii.  the departure
     viii. song of indian women




the bridal of pennacook.


winnepurkit, otherwise called george, sachem of saugus, married a
daughter of passaconaway, the great pennacook chieftain, in 1662. the
wedding took place at pennacook (now concord, n. h.), and the ceremonies
closed with a great feast. according to the usages of the chiefs,
passaconaway ordered a select number of his men to accompany the
newly-married couple to the dwelling of the husband, where in turn there
was another great feast. some time after, the wife of winnepurkit
expressing a desire to visit her father's house was permitted to go,
accompanied by a brave escort of her husband's chief men. but when she
wished to return, her father sent a messenger to saugus, informing her
husband, and asking him to come and take her away. he returned for
answer that he had escorted his wife to her father's house in a style
that became a chief, and that now if she wished to return, her father
must send her back, in the same way. this passaconaway refused to do,
and it is said that here terminated the connection of his daughter with
the saugus chief.--vide morton's new canaan.


we had been wandering for many days
through the rough northern country. we had seen
the sunset, with its bars of purple cloud,
like a new heaven, shine upward from the lake
of winnepiseogee; and had felt
the sunrise breezes, midst the leafy isles
which stoop their summer beauty to the lips
of the bright waters. we had checked our steeds,
silent with wonder, where the mountain wall
is piled to heaven; and, through the narrow rift
of the vast rocks, against whose rugged feet
beats the mad torrent with perpetual roar,
where noonday is as twilight, and the wind
comes burdened with the everlasting moan
of forests and of far-off waterfalls,
we had looked upward where the summer sky,
tasselled with clouds light-woven by the sun,
sprung its blue arch above the abutting crags
o'er-roofing the vast portal of the land
beyond the wall of mountains. we had passed
the high source of the saco; and bewildered
in the dwarf spruce-belts of the crystal hills,
had heard above us, like a voice in the cloud,
the horn of fabyan sounding; and atop
of old agioochook had seen the mountains'
piled to the northward, shagged with wood, and thick
as meadow mole-hills,--the far sea of casco,
a white gleam on the horizon of the east;
fair lakes, embosomed in the woods and hills;
moosehillock's mountain range, and kearsarge
lifting his granite forehead to the sun!

and we had rested underneath the oaks
shadowing the bank, whose grassy spires are shaken
by the perpetual beating of the falls
of the wild ammonoosuc. we had tracked
the winding pemigewasset, overhung
by beechen shadows, whitening down its rocks,
or lazily gliding through its intervals,
from waving rye-fields sending up the gleam
of sunlit waters. we had seen the moon
rising behind umbagog's eastern pines,
like a great indian camp-fire; and its beams
at midnight spanning with a bridge of silver
the merrimac by uncanoonuc's falls.

there were five souls of us whom travel's chance
had thrown together in these wild north hills
a city lawyer, for a month escaping
from his dull office, where the weary eye
saw only hot brick walls and close thronged streets;
briefless as yet, but with an eye to see
life's sunniest side, and with a heart to take
its chances all as godsends; and his brother,
pale from long pulpit studies, yet retaining
the warmth and freshness of a genial heart,
whose mirror of the beautiful and true,
in man and nature, was as yet undimmed
by dust of theologic strife, or breath
of sect, or cobwebs of scholastic lore;
like a clear crystal calm of water, taking
the hue and image of o'erleaning flowers,
sweet human faces, white clouds of the noon,
slant starlight glimpses through the dewy leaves,
and tenderest moonrise. 't was, in truth, a study,
to mark his spirit, alternating between
a decent and professional gravity
and an irreverent mirthfulness, which often
laughed in the face of his divinity,
plucked off the sacred ephod, quite unshrined
the oracle, and for the pattern priest
left us the man. a shrewd, sagacious merchant,
to whom the soiled sheet found in crawford's inn,
giving the latest news of city stocks
and sales of cotton, had a deeper meaning
than the great presence of the awful mountains
glorified by the sunset; and his daughter,
a delicate flower on whom had blown too long
those evil winds, which, sweeping from the ice
and winnowing the fogs of labrador,
shed their cold blight round massachusetts bay,
with the same breath which stirs spring's opening leaves
and lifts her half-formed flower-bell on its stem,
poisoning our seaside atmosphere.

it chanced that as we turned upon our homeward way,
a drear northeastern storm came howling up
the valley of the saco; and that girl
who had stood with us upon mount washington,
her brown locks ruffled by the wind which whirled
in gusts around its sharp, cold pinnacle,
who had joined our gay trout-fishing in the streams
which lave that giant's feet; whose laugh was heard
like a bird's carol on the sunrise breeze
which swelled our sail amidst the lake's green islands,
shrank from its harsh, chill breath, and visibly drooped
like a flower in the frost. so, in that quiet inn
which looks from conway on the mountains piled
heavily against the horizon of the north,
like summer thunder-clouds, we made our home
and while the mist hung over dripping hills,
and the cold wind-driven rain-drops all day long
beat their sad music upon roof and pane,
we strove to cheer our gentle invalid.

the lawyer in the pauses of the storm
went angling down the saco, and, returning,
recounted his adventures and mishaps;
gave us the history of his scaly clients,
mingling with ludicrous yet apt citations
of barbarous law latin, passages
from izaak walton's angler, sweet and fresh
as the flower-skirted streams of staffordshire,
where, under aged trees, the southwest wind
of soft june mornings fanned the thin, white hair
of the sage fisher. and, if truth be told,
our youthful candidate forsook his sermons,
his commentaries, articles and creeds,
for the fair page of human loveliness,
the missal of young hearts, whose sacred text
is music, its illumining, sweet smiles.
he sang the songs she loved; and in his low,
deep, earnest voice, recited many a page
of poetry, the holiest, tenderest lines
of the sad bard of olney, the sweet songs,
simple and beautiful as truth and nature,
of him whose whitened locks on rydal mount
are lifted yet by morning breezes blowing
from the green hills, immortal in his lays.
and for myself, obedient to her wish,
i searched our landlord's proffered library,--
a well-thumbed bunyan, with its nice wood pictures
of scaly fiends and angels not unlike them;
watts' unmelodious psalms; astrology's
last home, a musty pile of almanacs,
and an old chronicle of border wars
and indian history. and, as i read
a story of the marriage of the chief
of saugus to the dusky weetamoo,
daughter of passaconaway, who dwelt
in the old time upon the merrimac,
our fair one, in the playful exercise
of her prerogative,--the right divine
of youth and beauty,--bade us versify
the legend, and with ready pencil sketched
its plan and outlines, laughingly assigning
to each his part, and barring our excuses
with absolute will. so, like the cavaliers
whose voices still are heard in the romance
of silver-tongued boccaccio, on the banks
of arno, with soft tales of love beguiling
the ear of languid beauty, plague-exiled
from stately florence, we rehearsed our rhymes
to their fair auditor, and shared by turns
her kind approval and her playful censure.

it may be that these fragments owe alone
to the fair setting of their circumstances,--
the associations of time, scene, and audience,--
their place amid the pictures which fill up
the chambers of my memory. yet i trust
that some, who sigh, while wandering in thought,
pilgrims of romance o'er the olden world,
that our broad land,--our sea-like lakes and mountains
piled to the clouds, our rivers overhung
by forests which have known no other change
for ages than the budding and the fall
of leaves, our valleys lovelier than those
which the old poets sang of,--should but figure
on the apocryphal chart of speculation
as pastures, wood-lots, mill-sites, with the privileges,
rights, and appurtenances, which make up
a yankee paradise, unsung, unknown,
to beautiful tradition; even their names,
whose melody yet lingers like the last
vibration of the red man's requiem,
exchanged for syllables significant,
of cotton-mill and rail-car, will look kindly
upon this effort to call up the ghost
of our dim past, and listen with pleased ear
to the responses of the questioned shade.

i. the merrimac.
o child of that white-crested mountain whose
springs
gush forth in the shade of the cliff-eagle's
wings,
down whose slopes to the lowlands thy wild waters
shine,
leaping gray walls of rock, flashing through the
dwarf pine;
from that cloud-curtained cradle so cold and so
lone,
from the arms of that wintry-locked mother of
stone,
by hills hung with forests, through vales wide and
free,
thy mountain-born brightness glanced down to the
sea.

no bridge arched thy waters save that where the
trees
stretched their long arms above thee and kissed in
the breeze:
no sound save the lapse of the waves on thy
shores,
the plunging of otters, the light dip of oars.

green-tufted, oak-shaded, by amoskeag's fall
thy twin uncanoonucs rose stately and tall,
thy nashua meadows lay green and unshorn,
and the hills of pentucket were tasselled with
corn.
but thy pennacook valley was fairer than these,
and greener its grasses and taller its trees,
ere the sound of an axe in the forest had rung,
or the mower his scythe in the meadows had
swung.

in their sheltered repose looking out from the
wood
the bark-builded wigwams of pennacook stood;
there glided the corn-dance, the council-fire shone,
and against the red war-post the hatchet was
thrown.

there the old smoked in silence their pipes, and
the young
to the pike and the white-perch their baited lines
flung;
there the boy shaped his arrows, and there the
shy maid
wove her many-hued baskets and bright wampum
braid.

o stream of the mountains! if answer of thine
could rise from thy waters to question of mine,
methinks through the din of thy thronged banks
a moan
of sorrow would swell for the days which have
gone.

not for thee the dull jar of the loom and the wheel,
the gliding of shuttles, the ringing of steel;
but that old voice of waters, of bird and of breeze,
the dip of the wild-fowl, the rustling of trees.


ii. the bashaba.
lift we the twilight curtains of the past,
and, turning from familiar sight and sound,
sadly and full of reverence let us cast
a glance upon tradition's shadowy ground,
led by the few pale lights which, glimmering round
that dim, strange land of eld, seem dying fast;
and that which history gives not to the eye,
the faded coloring of time's tapestry,
let fancy, with her dream-dipped brush, supply.

roof of bark and walls of pine,
through whose chinks the sunbeams shine,
tracing many a golden line
on the ample floor within;
where, upon that earth-floor stark,
lay the gaudy mats of bark,
with the bear's hide, rough and dark,
and the red-deer's skin.

window-tracery, small and slight,
woven of the willow white,
lent a dimly checkered light;
and the night-stars glimmered down,
where the lodge-fire's heavy smoke,
slowly through an opening broke,
in the low roof, ribbed with oak,
sheathed with hemlock brown.

gloomed behind the changeless shade
by the solemn pine-wood made;
through the rugged palisade,
in the open foreground planted,
glimpses came of rowers rowing,
stir of leaves and wild-flowers blowing,
steel-like gleams of water flowing,
in the sunlight slanted.

here the mighty bashaba
held his long-unquestioned sway,
from the white hills, far away,
to the great sea's sounding shore;
chief of chiefs, his regal word
all the river sachems heard,
at his call the war-dance stirred,
or was still once more.

there his spoils of chase and war,
jaw of wolf and black bear's paw,
panther's skin and eagle's claw,
lay beside his axe and bow;
and, adown the roof-pole hung,
loosely on a snake-skin strung,
in the smoke his scalp-locks swung
grimly to and fro.

nightly down the river going,
swifter was the hunter's rowing,
when he saw that lodge-fire, glowing
o'er the waters still and red;
and the squaw's dark eye burned brighter,
and she drew her blanket tighter,
as, with quicker step and lighter,
from that door she fled.

for that chief had magic skill,
and a panisee's dark will,
over powers of good and ill,
powers which bless and powers which ban;
wizard lord of pennacook,
chiefs upon their war-path shook,
when they met the steady look
of that wise dark man.

tales of him the gray squaw told,
when the winter night-wind cold
pierced her blanket's thickest fold,
and her fire burned low and small,
till the very child abed,
drew its bear-skin over bead,
shrinking from the pale lights shed
on the trembling wall.

all the subtle spirits hiding
under earth or wave, abiding
in the caverned rock, or riding
misty clouds or morning breeze;
every dark intelligence,
secret soul, and influence
of all things which outward sense
feels, or bears, or sees,--

these the wizard's skill confessed,
at his bidding banned or blessed,
stormful woke or lulled to rest
wind and cloud, and fire and flood;
burned for him the drifted snow,
bade through ice fresh lilies blow,
and the leaves of summer grow
over winter's wood!

not untrue that tale of old!
now, as then, the wise and bold
all the powers of nature hold
subject to their kingly will;
from the wondering crowds ashore,
treading life's wild waters o'er,
as upon a marble floor,
moves the strong man still.

still, to such, life's elements
with their sterner laws dispense,
and the chain of consequence
broken in their pathway lies;
time and change their vassals making,
flowers from icy pillows waking,
tresses of the sunrise shaking
over midnight skies.
still, to th' earnest soul, the sun
rests on towered gibeon,
and the moon of ajalon
lights the battle-grounds of life;
to his aid the strong reverses
hidden powers and giant forces,
and the high stars, in their courses,
mingle in his strife!


iii. the daughter.
the soot-black brows of men, the yell
of women thronging round the bed,
the tinkling charm of ring and shell,
the powah whispering o'er the dead!

all these the sachem's home had known,
when, on her journey long and wild
to the dim world of souls, alone,
in her young beauty passed the mother of his child.

three bow-shots from the sachem's dwelling
they laid her in the walnut shade,
where a green hillock gently swelling
her fitting mound of burial made.
there trailed the vine in summer hours,
the tree-perched squirrel dropped his shell,--
on velvet moss and pale-hued flowers,
woven with leaf and spray, the softened sunshine fell!

the indian's heart is hard and cold,
it closes darkly o'er its care,
and formed in nature's sternest mould,
is slow to feel, and strong to bear.
the war-paint on the sachem's face,
unwet with tears, shone fierce and red,
and still, in battle or in chase,
dry leaf and snow-rime crisped beneath his
foremost tread.

yet when her name was heard no more,
and when the robe her mother gave,
and small, light moccasin she wore,
had slowly wasted on her grave,
unmarked of him the dark maids sped
their sunset dance and moonlit play;
no other shared his lonely bed,
no other fair young head upon his bosom lay.

a lone, stern man. yet, as sometimes
the tempest-smitten tree receives
from one small root the sap which climbs
its topmost spray and crowning leaves,
so from his child the sachem drew
a life of love and hope, and felt
his cold and rugged nature through
the softness and the warmth of her young
being melt.

a laugh which in the woodland rang
bemocking april's gladdest bird,--
a light and graceful form which sprang
to meet him when his step was heard,--
eyes by his lodge-fire flashing dark,
small fingers stringing bead and shell
or weaving mats of bright-hued bark,--
with these the household-god [3] had graced
his wigwam well.

child of the forest! strong and free,
slight-robed, with loosely flowing hair,
she swam the lake or climbed the tree,
or struck the flying bird in air.
o'er the heaped drifts of winter's moon
her snow-shoes tracked the hunter's way;
and dazzling in the summer noon
the blade of her light oar threw off its shower
of spray!

unknown to her the rigid rule,
the dull restraint, the chiding frown,
the weary torture of the school,
the taming of wild nature down.
her only lore, the legends told
around the hunter's fire at night;
stars rose and set, and seasons rolled,
flowers bloomed and snow-flakes fell, unquestioned
in her sight.

unknown to her the subtle skill
with which the artist-eye can trace
in rock and tree and lake and hill
the outlines of divinest grace;
unknown the fine soul's keen unrest,
which sees, admires, yet yearns alway;
too closely on her mother's breast
to note her smiles of love the child of nature lay!

it is enough for such to be
of common, natural things a part,
to feel, with bird and stream and tree,
the pulses of the same great heart;
but we, from nature long exiled,
in our cold homes of art and thought
grieve like the stranger-tended child,
which seeks its mother's arms, and sees but feels
them not.

the garden rose may richly bloom
in cultured soil and genial air,
to cloud the light of fashion's room
or droop in beauty's midnight hair;
in lonelier grace, to sun and dew
the sweetbrier on the hillside shows
its single leaf and fainter hue,
untrained and wildly free, yet still a sister rose!

thus o'er the heart of weetamoo
their mingling shades of joy and ill
the instincts of her nature threw;
the savage was a woman still.
midst outlines dim of maiden schemes,
heart-colored prophecies of life,
rose on the ground of her young dreams
the light of a new home, the lover and the wife.


iv. the wedding.
cool and dark fell the autumn night,
but the bashaba's wigwam glowed with light,
for down from its roof, by green withes hung,
flaring and smoking the pine-knots swung.

and along the river great wood-fires
shot into the night their long, red spires,
showing behind the tall, dark wood,
flashing before on the sweeping flood.

in the changeful wind, with shimmer and shade,
now high, now low, that firelight played,
on tree-leaves wet with evening dews,
on gliding water and still canoes.

the trapper that night on turee's brook,
and the weary fisher on contoocook,
saw over the marshes, and through the pine,
and down on the river, the dance-lights shine.
for the saugus sachem had come to woo
the bashaba's daughter weetamoo,
and laid at her father's feet that night
his softest furs and wampum white.

from the crystal hills to the far southeast
the river sagamores came to the feast;
and chiefs whose homes the sea-winds shook
sat down on the mats of pennacook.

they came from sunapee's shore of rock,
from the snowy sources of snooganock,
and from rough coos whose thick woods shake
their pine-cones in umbagog lake.

from ammonoosuc's mountain pass,
wild as his home, came chepewass;
and the keenomps of the bills which throw
their shade on the smile of manito.

with pipes of peace and bows unstrung,
glowing with paint came old and young,
in wampum and furs and feathers arrayed,
to the dance and feast the bashaba made.

bird of the air and beast of the field,
all which the woods and the waters yield,
on dishes of birch and hemlock piled,
garnished and graced that banquet wild.

steaks of the brown bear fat and large
from the rocky slopes of the kearsarge;
delicate trout from babboosuck brook,
and salmon speared in the contoocook;

squirrels which fed where nuts fell thick
in the gravelly bed of the otternic;
and small wild-hens in reed-snares caught
from the banks of sondagardee brought;

pike and perch from the suncook taken,
nuts from the trees of the black hills shaken,
cranberries picked in the squamscot bog,
and grapes from the vines of piscataquog:

and, drawn from that great stone vase which stands
in the river scooped by a spirit's hands,[4]
garnished with spoons of shell and horn,
stood the birchen dishes of smoking corn.

thus bird of the air and beast of the field,
all which the woods and the waters yield,
furnished in that olden day
the bridal feast of the bashaba.

and merrily when that feast was done
on the fire-lit green the dance begun,
with squaws' shrill stave, and deeper hum
of old men beating the indian drum.

painted and plumed, with scalp-locks flowing,
and red arms tossing and black eyes glowing,
now in the light and now in the shade
around the fires the dancers played.

the step was quicker, the song more shrill,
and the beat of the small drums louder still
whenever within the circle drew
the saugus sachem and weetamoo.

the moons of forty winters had shed
their snow upon that chieftain's head,
and toil and care and battle's chance
had seamed his hard, dark countenance.

a fawn beside the bison grim,--
why turns the bride's fond eye on him,
in whose cold look is naught beside
the triumph of a sullen pride?

ask why the graceful grape entwines
the rough oak with her arm of vines;
and why the gray rock's rugged cheek
the soft lips of the mosses seek.

why, with wise instinct, nature seems
to harmonize her wide extremes,
linking the stronger with the weak,
the haughty with the soft and meek!


v. the new home.
a wild and broken landscape, spiked with firs,
roughening the bleak horizon's northern edge;
steep, cavernous hillsides, where black hemlock
spurs
and sharp, gray splinters of the wind-swept
ledge
pierced the thin-glazed ice, or bristling rose,
where the cold rim of the sky sunk down upon
the snows.

and eastward cold, wide marshes stretched away,
dull, dreary flats without a bush or tree,
o'er-crossed by icy creeks, where twice a day
gurgled the waters of the moon-struck sea;
and faint with distance came the stifled roar,
the melancholy lapse of waves on that low shore.

no cheerful village with its mingling smokes,
no laugh of children wrestling in the snow,
no camp-fire blazing through the hillside oaks,
no fishers kneeling on the ice below;
yet midst all desolate things of sound and view,
through the long winter moons smiled dark-eyed
weetamoo.

her heart had found a home; and freshly all
its beautiful affections overgrew
their rugged prop. as o'er some granite wall
soft vine-leaves open to the moistening dew
and warm bright sun, the love of that young wife
found on a hard cold breast the dew and warmth
of life.

the steep, bleak hills, the melancholy shore,
the long, dead level of the marsh between,
a coloring of unreal beauty wore
through the soft golden mist of young love seen.
for o'er those hills and from that dreary plain,
nightly she welcomed home her hunter chief again.

no warmth of heart, no passionate burst of feeling,
repaid her welcoming smile and parting kiss,
no fond and playful dalliance half concealing,
under the guise of mirth, its tenderness;

but, in their stead, the warrior's settled pride,
and vanity's pleased smile with homage satisfied.

enough for weetamoo, that she alone
sat on his mat and slumbered at his side;
that he whose fame to her young ear had flown
now looked upon her proudly as his bride;
that he whose name the mohawk trembling heard
vouchsafed to her at times a kindly look or word.

for she had learned the maxims of her race,
which teach the woman to become a slave,
and feel herself the pardonless disgrace
of love's fond weakness in the wise and brave,--
the scandal and the shame which they incur,
who give to woman all which man requires of her.

so passed the winter moons. the sun at last
broke link by link the frost chain of the rills,
and the warm breathings of the southwest passed
over the hoar rime of the saugus hills;
the gray and desolate marsh grew green once more,
and the birch-tree's tremulous shade fell round the
sachem's door.

then from far pennacook swift runners came,
with gift and greeting for the saugus chief;
beseeching him in the great sachem's name,
that, with the coming of the flower and leaf,
the song of birds, the warm breeze and the rain,
young weetamoo might greet her lonely sire again.

and winnepurkit called his chiefs together,
and a grave council in his wigwam met,
solemn and brief in words, considering whether
the rigid rules of forest etiquette
permitted weetamoo once more to look
upon her father's face and green-banked
pennacook.

with interludes of pipe-smoke and strong water,
the forest sages pondered, and at length,
concluded in a body to escort her
up to her father's home of pride and strength,
impressing thus on pennacook a sense
of winnepurkit's power and regal consequence.

so through old woods which aukeetamit's[5] hand,
a soft and many-shaded greenness lent,
over high breezy hills, and meadow land
yellow with flowers, the wild procession went,
till, rolling down its wooded banks between,
a broad, clear, mountain stream, the merrimac
was seen.

the hunter leaning on his bow undrawn,
the fisher lounging on the pebbled shores,
squaws in the clearing dropping the seed-corn,
young children peering through the wigwam doors,
saw with delight, surrounded by her train
of painted saugus braves, their weetamoo again.


vi. at pennacook.
the hills are dearest which our childish feet
have climbed the earliest; and the streams most sweet
are ever those at which our young lips drank,
stooped to their waters o'er the grassy bank.

midst the cold dreary sea-watch, home's hearth-light
shines round the helmsman plunging through the night;
and still, with inward eye, the traveller sees
in close, dark, stranger streets his native trees.

the home-sick dreamer's brow is nightly fanned
by breezes whispering of his native land,
and on the stranger's dim and dying eye
the soft, sweet pictures of his childhood lie.

joy then for weetamoo, to sit once more
a child upon her father's wigwam floor!
once more with her old fondness to beguile
from his cold eye the strange light of a smile.

the long, bright days of summer swiftly passed,
the dry leaves whirled in autumn's rising blast,
and evening cloud and whitening sunrise rime
told of the coming of the winter-time.

but vainly looked, the while, young weetamoo,
down the dark river for her chief's canoe;
no dusky messenger from saugus brought
the grateful tidings which the young wife sought.

at length a runner from her father sent,
to winnepurkit's sea-cooled wigwam went
"eagle of saugus,--in the woods the dove
mourns for the shelter of thy wings of love."

but the dark chief of saugus turned aside
in the grim anger of hard-hearted pride;
i bore her as became a chieftain's daughter,
up to her home beside the gliding water.

if now no more a mat for her is found
of all which line her father's wigwam round,
let pennacook call out his warrior train,
and send her back with wampum gifts again."

the baffled runner turned upon his track,
bearing the words of winnepurkit back.
"dog of the marsh," cried pennacook, "no more
shall child of mine sit on his wigwam floor.

"go, let him seek some meaner squaw to spread
the stolen bear-skin of his beggar's bed;
son of a fish-hawk! let him dig his clams
for some vile daughter of the agawams,

"or coward nipmucks! may his scalp dry black
in mohawk smoke, before i send her back."
he shook his clenched hand towards the ocean wave,
while hoarse assent his listening council gave.

alas poor bride! can thy grim sire impart
his iron hardness to thy woman's heart?
or cold self-torturing pride like his atone
for love denied and life's warm beauty flown?

on autumn's gray and mournful grave the snow
hung its white wreaths; with stifled voice and low
the river crept, by one vast bridge o'er-crossed,
built by the boar-locked artisan of frost.

and many a moon in beauty newly born
pierced the red sunset with her silver horn,
or, from the east, across her azure field
rolled the wide brightness of her full-orbed shield.

yet winnepurkit came not,--on the mat
of the scorned wife her dusky rival sat;
and he, the while, in western woods afar,
urged the long chase, or trod the path of war.

dry up thy tears, young daughter of a chief!
waste not on him the sacredness of grief;
be the fierce spirit of thy sire thine own,
his lips of scorning, and his heart of stone.

what heeds the warrior of a hundred fights,
the storm-worn watcher through long hunting nights,
cold, crafty, proud of woman's weak distress,
her home-bound grief and pining loneliness?


vii. the departure.
the wild march rains had fallen fast and long
the snowy mountains of the north among,
making each vale a watercourse, each hill
bright with the cascade of some new-made rill.

gnawed by the sunbeams, softened by the rain,
heaved underneath by the swollen current's strain,
the ice-bridge yielded, and the merrimac
bore the huge ruin crashing down its track.

on that strong turbid water, a small boat
guided by one weak hand was seen to float;
evil the fate which loosed it from the shore,
too early voyager with too frail an oar!

down the vexed centre of that rushing tide,
the thick huge ice-blocks threatening either side,
the foam-white rocks of amoskeag in view,
with arrowy swiftness sped that light canoe.

the trapper, moistening his moose's meat
on the wet bank by uncanoonuc's feet,
saw the swift boat flash down the troubled stream;
slept he, or waked he? was it truth or dream?

the straining eye bent fearfully before,
the small hand clenching on the useless oar,
the bead-wrought blanket trailing o'er the water--
he knew them all--woe for the sachem's daughter!

sick and aweary of her lonely life,
heedless of peril, the still faithful wife
had left her mother's grave, her father's door,
to seek the wigwam of her chief once more.

down the white rapids like a sear leaf whirled,
on the sharp rocks and piled-up ices hurled,
empty and broken, circled the canoe
in the vexed pool below--but where was weetamoo.


viii. song of indian women.
the dark eye has left us,
the spring-bird has flown;
on the pathway of spirits
she wanders alone.
the song of the wood-dove has died on our shore
mat wonck kunna-monee![6] we hear it no more!

o dark water spirit
we cast on thy wave
these furs which may never
hang over her grave;
bear down to the lost one the robes that she wore
mat wonck kunna-monee! we see her no more!

of the strange land she walks in
no powah has told:
it may burn with the sunshine,
or freeze with the cold.
let us give to our lost one the robes that she wore:
mat wonck kunna-monee! we see her no more!

the path she is treading
shall soon be our own;
each gliding in shadow
unseen and alone!
in vain shall we call on the souls gone before:
mat wonck kunna-monee! they hear us no more!

o mighty sowanna![7]
thy gateways unfold,
from thy wigwam of sunset
lift curtains of gold!

take home the poor spirit whose journey is o'er
mat wonck kunna-monee! we see her no more!

so sang the children of the leaves beside
the broad, dark river's coldly flowing tide;
now low, now harsh, with sob-like pause and swell,
on the high wind their voices rose and fell.
nature's wild music,--sounds of wind-swept trees,
the scream of birds, the wailing of the breeze,
the roar of waters, steady, deep, and strong,--
mingled and murmured in that farewell song.

1844.




