



produced by keren vergon, david king and pg distributed proofreaders




the letters of charles and mary lamb

1796-1820

edited by e. v. lucas

with a frontispiece



preface


this edition of the correspondence of charles and mary lamb contains 618

purposes of a single life, so give yourself no further concern about it.
the money would be superfluous to me, if i had it.

with regard to allen,--the woman he has married has some money, i have
heard about l200 a year, enough for the maintenance of herself &
children, one of whom is a girl nine years old! so allen has dipt
betimes into the cares of a family. i very seldom see him, & do not know
whether he has given up the westminster hospital.

when southey becomes as modest as his predecessor milton, and publishes
his epics in duodecimo, i will read 'em,--a guinea a book is somewhat
exorbitant, nor have i the opportunity of borrowing the work. the
extracts from it in the monthly review and the short passages in your
watchman seem to me much superior to any thing in his partnership
account with lovell.

your poems i shall procure forthwith. there were noble lines in what you
inserted in one of your numbers from religious musings, but i thought
them elaborate. i am somewhat glad you have given up that paper--it must
have been dry, unprofitable, and of "dissonant mood" to your
disposition. i wish you success in all your undertakings, and am glad to
hear you are employed about the evidences of religion. there is need of
multiplying such books an hundred fold in this philosophical age to
_prevent_ converts to atheism, for they seem too tough disputants to
meddle with afterwards. i am sincerely sorry for allen, as a family man
particularly.

le grice is gone to make puns in cornwall. he has got a tutorship to a
young boy, living with his mother, a widow lady. he will of course
initiate him quickly in "whatsoever things are lovely, honorable, and of
good report." he has cut miss hunt compleatly,--the poor girl is very
ill on the occasion, but he laughs at it, and justifies himself by
saying, "she does not see him laugh." coleridge, i know not what
suffering scenes you have gone through at bristol--my life has been
somewhat diversified of late. the 6 weeks that finished last year and
began this your very humble servant spent very agreeably in a mad house
at hoxton--i am got somewhat rational now, and don't bite any one. but
mad i was--and many a vagary my imagination played with me, enough to
make a volume if all told.

my sonnets i have extended to the number of nine since i saw you, and
will some day communicate to you.

i am beginning a poem in blank verse, which if i finish i publish.

white is on the eve of publishing (he took the hint from vortigern)
original letters of falstaff, shallow &c--, a copy you shall have when
it comes out. they are without exception the best imitations i ever saw.

coleridge, it may convince you of my regards for you when i tell you my
head ran on you in my madness, as much almost as on another person, who
i am inclined to think was the more immediate cause of my temporary
frenzy.

the sonnet i send you has small merit as poetry but you will be curious
to read it when i tell you it was written in my prison-house in one of
my lucid intervals.

to my sister

if from my lips some angry accents fell,
  peevish complaint, or harsh reproof unkind,
'twas but the error of a sickly mind,
and troubled thoughts, clouding the purer well,
  and waters clear, of reason; and for me,
  let this my verse the poor atonement be,
my verse, which thou to praise wast ever inclined
  too highly, and with a partial eye to see
no blemish: thou to me didst ever shew
  fondest affection, and woud'st oftimes lend
an ear to the desponding love sick lay,
  weeping my sorrows with me, who repay
but ill the mighty debt of love i owe,
  mary, to thee, my sister and my friend.

with these lines, and with that sister's kindest remembrances to c----,
i conclude--

yours sincerely

lamb.

your conciones ad populum are the most eloquent politics that ever came
in my way.

write, when convenient--not as a task, for there is nothing in this
letter to answer.

you may inclose under cover to me at the india house what letters you
please, for they come post free.

we cannot send our remembrances to mrs. c---- not having seen her, but
believe me our best good wishes attend you both.

my civic and poetic compts to southey if at bristol.--why, he is a very
leviathan of bards--the small minnow i--

[this is the earliest letter of lamb's that has come down to us. on
february 10, 1796, he was just twenty-one years old, and was now living
at 7 little queen street (since demolished) with his father, mother,
aunt sarah lamb (known as aunt hetty), mary lamb and, possibly, john
lamb. john lamb, senior, was doing nothing and had, i think, already
begun to break up: his old master, samuel salt, had died in february,
1792. john lamb, the son (born june 5, 1763), had a clerkship at the
south-sea house; charles lamb had begun his long period of service in
the india house; and mary lamb (born december 3, 1764) was occupied as a
mantua-maker.

at this time coleridge was twenty-three; he would be twenty-four on
october 21. his military experiences over, he had married sara fricker
on october 4, 1795 (a month before southey married her sister edith),
and was living at bristol, on redcliffe hill. the first number of _the
watchman_ was dated on march 1, 1796; on may 13, 1796, it came to an
end. on april 16, 1796, cottle had issued coleridge's _poems on various
subjects_, containing also four "effusions" by charles lamb (nos. vii.,
xi., xii. and xiii.), and the "religious musings." southey, on bad terms
with coleridge, partly on account of southey's abandonment of
pantisocracy, was in lisbon. his _joan of arc_ had just been published
by cottle in quarto at a guinea. previously he had collaborated in _the
fall of robespierre_, 1794, with coleridge and robert lovell. each, one
evening, had set forth to write an act by the next. southey and lovell
did so, but coleridge brought only a part of his. lovell's being
useless, southey rewrote his act, coleridge finished his at leisure, and
the result was published. robert lovell (1770?-1796) had also been
associated with coleridge and southey in pantisocracy and was their
brother-in-law, having married mary fricker, another of the sisters.
when, in 1795, southey and lovell had published a joint volume of
_poems_, southey took the pseudonym of bion and lovell of moschus.

may was probably the landlord of the salutation and cat. the london
directory for 1808 has "william may, salutation coffee house, 17 newgate
street." we must suppose that when coleridge quitted the salutation and
cat in january, 1795, he was unable to pay his bill, and therefore had
to leave his luggage behind. cottle's story of coleridge being offered
free lodging by a london inn-keeper, if he would only talk and talk,
must then either be a pretty invention or apply to another landlord,
possibly the host of the angel in butcher hall street.

allen was robert allen, a schoolfellow of lamb and coleridge, and
coleridge's first friend. he was born on october 18, 1772. both lamb and
leigh hunt tell good stories of him at christ's hospital, lamb in _elia_
and hunt in his _autobiography_. from christ's hospital he went to
university college, oxford, and it was he who introduced coleridge and
hucks to southey in 1794. probably, says mr. e. h. coleridge, it was he
who brought coleridge and john stoddart (afterwards sir john, and
hazlitt's brother-in-law) together. on leaving oxford he seems to have
gone to westminster to learn surgery, and in 1797 he was appointed
deputy-surgeon to the 2nd royals, then in portugal. he married a widow
with children; at some time later took to journalism, as lamb's
reference in the _elia_ essay on "newspapers" tells us; and he died of
apoplexy in 1805.

coleridge's employment on the _evidences of religion_, whatever it may
have been, did not reach print.

le grice was charles valentine le grice (1773-1858), an old christ's
hospitaller and grecian (see lamb's _elia_ essays on "christ's hospital"
and "grace before meat"). le grice passed to trinity college, cambridge.
he left in 1796 and became tutor to william john godolphin nicholls of
trereife, near penzance, the only son of a widowed mother. le grice was
ordained in 1798 and married mrs. nicholls in 1799. young nicholls died
in 1815 and mrs. le grice in 1821, when le grice became sole owner of
the trereife property. he was incumbent of st. mary's, penzance, for
some years. le grice was a witty, rebellious character, but he never
fulfilled the promise of his early days. it has been conjectured that
his skill in punning awakened lamb's ambition in that direction. le
grice saw lamb next in 1834, at the bell at edmonton. his recollections
of lamb were included by talfourd in the _memorials_, and his
recollections of coleridge were printed in the _gentleman's magazine_,
december, 1834. i know nothing of miss hunt.

of lamb's confinement in a madhouse we know no more than is here told.
it is conjectured that the "other person" to whom lamb refers a few
lines later was ann simmons, a girl at widford for whom he had an
attachment that had been discouraged, if not forbidden, by her friends.
this is the only attack of the kind that lamb is known to have suffered.
he once told coleridge that during his illness he had sometimes believed
himself to be young norval in home's "douglas."

the poem in blank verse was, we learn in a subsequent letter, "the
grandame," or possibly an autobiographical work of which "the grandame"
is the only portion that survived.

white was james white (1775-1820), an old christ's hospitaller and a
friend and almost exact contemporary of lamb. lamb, who first kindled
his enthusiasm for shakespeare, was, i think, to some extent involved in
the _original letters, &c., of sir john falstaff and his friends_, which
appeared in 1796. the dedication--to master samuel irelaunde, meaning
william henry ireland (who sometimes took his father's name samuel), the
forger of the pretended shakespearian play "vortigern," produced at
drury lane earlier in the year--is quite in lamb's manner. white's
immortality, however, rests not upon this book, but upon his portrait in
the _elia_ essay on "chimney-sweepers."

the sonnet "to my sister" was printed, with slight alterations, by lamb
in coleridge's _poems_, second edition, 1797, and again in lamb's
_works_, 1818.

coleridge's _condones ad populum; or, addresses to the people_, had been
published at bristol in november, 1795.]




letter 2


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[probably begun either on tuesday, may 24, or tuesday, may 31, 1796.
postmark? june 1.]

i am in such violent pain with the head ach that i am fit for nothing
but transcribing, scarce for that. when i get your poems, and the joan
of arc, i will exercise my presumption in giving you my opinion of 'em.
the mail does not come in before tomorrow (wednesday) morning. the
following sonnet was composed during a walk down into hertfordshire
early in last summer.

the lord of light shakes off his drowsyhed.[*]
fresh from his couch up springs the lusty sun,
and girds himself his mighty race to run.
meantime, by truant love of rambling led,
i turn my back on thy detested walls,
proud city, and thy sons i leave behind,
a selfish, sordid, money-getting kind,
who shut their ears when holy freedom calls.
i pass not thee so lightly, humble spire,
that mindest me of many a pleasure gone,
of merriest days, of love and islington,
kindling anew the flames of past desire;
and i shall muse on thee, slow journeying on,
to the green plains of pleasant hertfordshire.

[footnote: drowsyhed i have met with i think in spencer. tis an old
thing, but it rhymes with led & rhyming covers a multitude of licences.]

the last line is a copy of bowles's, "to the green hamlet in the
peaceful plain." your ears are not so very fastidious--many people would
not like words so prosaic and familiar in a sonnet as islington and
hertfordshire. the next was written within a day or two of the last, on
revisiting a spot where the scene was laid of my 1st sonnet that "mock'd
my step with many a lonely glade."

when last i roved these winding wood-walks green,
green winding walks, and pathways shady-sweet,
oftimes would anna seek the silent scene,
shrouding her beauties in the lone retreat.
no more i hear her footsteps in the shade;
her image only in these pleasant ways
meets me self-wandring where in better days
i held free converse with my fair-hair'd maid.
i pass'd the little cottage, which she loved,
the cottage which did once my all contain:
it spake of days that ne'er must come again,
spake to my heart and much my heart was moved.
"now fair befall thee, gentle maid," said i,
and from the cottage turn'd me, with a sigh.

the next retains a few lines from a sonnet of mine, which you once
remarked had no "body of thought" in it. i agree with you, but have
preserved a part of it, and it runs thus. i flatter myself you will like
it.

a timid grace sits trembling in her eye,
as both to meet the rudeness of men's sight,
yet shedding a delicious lunar light,
that steeps in kind oblivious extacy
the care-craz'd mind, like some still melody;
speaking most plain the thoughts which do possess
her gentle sprite, peace and meek quietness,
and innocent loves,[*] and maiden purity.
a look whereof might heal the cruel smart
of changed friends, or fortune's wrongs unkind;
might to sweet deeds of mercy move the heart
of him, who hates his brethren of mankind.
turned are those beams from me, who fondly yet
past joys, vain loves, and buried hopes regret.

[footnote: cowley uses this phrase with a somewhat different meaning: i
meant loves of relatives friends &c.]

the next and last i value most of all. 'twas composed close upon the
heels of the last in that very wood i had in mind when i wrote "methinks
how dainty sweet."

we were two pretty babes, the youngest she,
the youngest and the loveliest far, i ween,
and innocence her name. the time has been,
we two did love each other's company;
time was, we two had wept to have been apart.
but when, with shew of seeming good beguil'd,
i left the garb and manners of a child,
and my first love for man's society,
defiling with the world my virgin heart,
my loved companion dropt a tear, and fled,
and hid in deepest shades her awful head.
beloved, who can tell me where thou art,
in what delicious eden to be found,
that i may seek thee the wide world around.

since writing it, i have found in a poem by hamilton of bangour, these 2
lines to happiness

nun sober and devout, where art thou fled
to hide in shades thy meek contented head.

lines eminently beautiful, but i do not remember having re'd 'em
previously, for the credit of my 10th and 11th lines. parnell has 2
lines (which probably suggested the _above_) to contentment

whither ah! whither art thou fled,
to hide thy meek contented head.[*]

[footnote: an odd epithet for contentment in a poet so poetical as
parnell.]

cowley's exquisite elegy on the death of his friend harvey suggested the
phrase of "we two"

"was there a tree that did not know
the love betwixt us two?----"

so much for acknowledged plagiarisms, the confession of which i know not
whether it has more of vanity or modesty in it. as to my blank verse i
am so dismally slow and sterile of ideas (i speak from my heart) that i
much question if it will ever come to any issue. i have hitherto only
hammered out a few indepen[den]t unconnected snatches, not in a capacity
to be sent. i am very ill, and will rest till i have read your
poems--for which i am very thankful. i have one more favour to beg of
you, that you never mention mr. may's affair in any sort, much less
_think_ of repaying. are we not flocci-nauci-what-d'ye-call-em-ists?

we have just learnd, that my poor brother has had a sad accident: a
large stone blown down by yesterday's high wind has bruised his leg in a
most shocking manner--he is under the care of cruikshanks. coleridge,
there are 10,000 objections against my paying you a visit at bristol--it
cannot be, else--but in this world 'tis better not to think too much of
pleasant possibles, that we may not be out of humour with present
insipids. should any thing bring you to london, you will recollect no.
7, little queen st. holborn.

i shall be too ill to call on wordsworth myself but will take care to
transmit him his poem, when i have read it. i saw le grice the day
before his departure, and mentioned incidentally his "teaching the young
idea how to shoot"--knowing him and the probability there is of people
having a propensity to pun in his company you will not wonder that we
both stumbled on the same pun at once, he eagerly anticipating me,--"he
would teach him to shoot!"--poor le grice! if wit alone could entitle a
man to respect, &c. he has written a very witty little pamphlet lately,
satirical upon college declamations; when i send white's book, i will
add that.

i am sorry there should be any difference between you and southey.
"between you two there should be peace," tho' i must say i have borne
him no good will since he spirited you away from among us. what is
become of moschus? you sported some of his sublimities, i see, in your
watchman. very decent things. so much for to night from your afflicted
headachey sorethroatey, humble servant c. lamb------tuesday
night---------.

of your watchmen, the review of burke was the best prose. i augurd great
things from the 1st number. there is some exquisite poetry interspersed.
i have re-read the extract from the religious musings and retract
whatever invidious there was in my censure of it as elaborate. there are
times when one is not in a disposition thoroughly to relish good
writing. i have re-read it in a more favourable moment and hesitate not
to pronounce it sublime. if there be any thing in it approachs to
tumidity (which i meant not to infer in elaborate: i meant simply
labored) it is the gigantic hyperbole by which you describe the evils of
existing society. snakes, lions, hyenas and behemoths, is carrying your
resentment beyond bounds. the pictures of the simoom, of frenzy and
ruin, of the whore of babylon and the cry of the foul spirits disherited
of earth and the strange beatitude which the good man shall recognise in
heaven--as well as the particularizing of the children of wretchedness--
(i have unconsciously included every part of it) form a variety of
uniform excellence. i hunger and thirst to read the poem complete. that
is a capital line in your 6th no.: "this dark freeze-coated, hoarse,
teeth-chattering month"--they are exactly such epithets as burns would
have stumbled on, whose poem on the ploughd up daisy you seem to have
had in mind. your complaint that [of] your readers some thought there
was too much, some too little, original matter in your nos., reminds me
of poor dead parsons in the critic--"too little incident! give me leave
to tell you, sir, there is too much incident." i had like to have forgot
thanking you for that exquisite little morsel the 1st sclavonian song.
the expression in the 2d "more happy to be unhappy in hell"--is it not
very quaint? accept my thanks in common with those of all who love good
poetry for the braes of yarrow. i congratulate you on the enemies you
must have made by your splendid invective against the barterers in
"human flesh and sinews." coleridge, you will rejoice to hear that
cowper is recovered from his lunacy, and is employ'd on his translation
of the italian &c. poems of milton, for an edition where fuseli presides
as designer. coleridge, to an idler like myself to write and receive
letters are both very pleasant, but i wish not to break in upon your
valuable time by expecting to hear very frequently from you. reserve
that obligation for your moments of lassitude, when you have nothing
else to do; for your loco-restive and all your idle propensities of
course have given way to the duties of providing for a family. the mail
is come in but no parcel, yet this is tuesday. farewell then till to
morrow, for a nich and a nook i must leave for criticisms. by the way i
hope you do not send your own only copy of joan of arc; i will in that
case return it immediately.

your parcel _is_ come, you have been _lavish_ of your presents.

wordsworth's poem i have hurried thro not without delight. poor lovell!
my heart almost accuses me for the light manner i spoke of him above,
not dreaming of his death. my heart bleeds for your accumulated
troubles, god send you thro' 'em with patience. i conjure you dream not
that i will ever think of being repaid! the very word is galling to the
ears. i have read all your rel. musings with uninterrupted feelings of
profound admiration. you may safely rest your fame on it. the best
remain'g things are what i have before read, and they lose nothing by my
recollection of your manner of reciting 'em, for i too bear in mind "the
voice, the look" of absent friends, and can occasionally mimic their
manner for the amusement of those who have seen 'em. your impassioned
manner of recitation i can recall at any time to mine own heart, and to
the ears of the bystanders. i rather wish you had left the monody on c.
concluding as it did abruptly. it had more of unity.--the conclusion of
your r musings i fear will entitle you to the reproof of your beloved
woman, who wisely will not suffer your fancy to run riot, but bids you
walk humbly with your god. the very last words "i exercise my young
noviciate tho't in ministeries of heart-stirring song," tho' not now new
to me, cannot be enough admired. to speak politely, they are a well
turnd compliment to poetry. i hasten to read joan of arc, &c. i have
read your lines at the begin'g of 2d book, they are worthy of milton,
but in my mind yield to your rel mus'gs. i shall read the whole
carefully and in some future letter take the liberty to particularize my
opinions of it. of what is new to me among your poems next to the
musings, that beginning "my pensive sara" gave me most pleasure: the
lines in it i just alluded to are most exquisite--they made my sister
and self smile, as conveying a pleasing picture of mrs. c. chequing your
wild wandrings, which we were so fond of hearing you indulge when among
us. it has endeared us more than any thing to your good lady; and your
own self-reproof that follows delighted us. 'tis a charming poem
throughout. (you have well remarked that "charming, admirable,
exquisite" are words expressive of feelings, more than conveying of
ideas, else i might plead very well want of room in my paper as excuse
for generalizing.) i want room to tell you how we are charmed with your
verses in the manner of spencer, &c. &c. &c. &c. &c. i am glad you
resume the watchman--change the name, leave out all articles of news,
and whatever things are peculiar to news papers, and confine yourself to
ethics, verse, criticism, or, rather do not confine yourself. let your
plan be as diffuse as the spectator, and i'll answer for it the work
prospers. if i am vain enough to think i can be a contributor, rely on
my inclinations. coleridge, in reading your r. musings i felt a
transient superiority over you: i _have_ seen priestly. i love to see
his name repeated in your writings. i love and honor him almost
profanely. you would be charmed with his _sermons_, if you never read
'em.--you have doubtless read his books, illustrative of the doctrine of
necessity. prefixed to a late work of his, in answer to paine, there is
a preface, given [?giving] an account of the man and his services to
men, written by lindsey, his dearest friend,--well worth your reading.

tuesday eve.--forgive my prolixity, which is yet too brief for all i
could wish to say.--god give you comfort and all that are of your
household.--our loves and best good wishes to mrs. c.

c. lamb.

[the postmark of this letter looks like june 1, but it might be june 7,
it was odd to date it "tuesday night" half way through, and "tuesday
eve" at the end. possibly lamb began it on tuesday, may 24, and finished
it on tuesday, may 31; possibly he began it on tuesday, may 31, and
finished it and posted it on tuesday, june 7.

the hertfordshire sonnet was printed in the _monthly magazine_ for
december, 1797, and not reprinted by lamb.

the sonnet that "mock'd my step with many a lonely glade" is that
beginning--

was it some sweet device of faery,

which had been printed in coleridge's _poems_, 1796. the second, third
and fourth of the sonnets that are copied in this letter were printed in
the second edition of coleridge's _poems_, 1797. anna is generally
supposed to be ann simmons, referred to in the previous note.

concerning "flocci-nauci-what-d'ye-call-'em-ists," canon ainger has the
following interesting note: "'flocci, nauci' is the beginning of a rule
in the old latin grammars, containing a list of words signifying 'of no
account,' _floccus_ being a lock of wool, and _naucus_ a trifle. lamb
was recalling a sentence in one of shenstone's letters:--'i loved him
for nothing so much as his flocci-nauci-nihili-pili-fication of money.'"
but "pantisocratists" was, of course, the word that lamb was shadowing.
pantisocracy, however--the new order of common living and high thinking,
to be established on the banks of the susquehanna by coleridge, southey,
favell, burnett and others--was already dead.

william cumberland cruikshank, the anatomist, who attended lamb's
brother, had attended dr. johnson in his last illness.

le grice's pamphlet was _a general theorem for a******* coll.
declamation_, by gronovius, 1796.

southey and coleridge had been on somewhat strained terms for some time;
possibly, as i have said in the previous note, owing to southey's
abandonment of pantisocratic fervour, which anticipated coleridge's by
some months. also, to marry sisters does not always lead to serenity.
the spiriting away of coleridge had been effected by southey in january,
1795, when he found coleridge at the angel in butcher hall street
(_vice_ the salutation in newgate street) and bore him back to bristol
and the forlorn sara fricker, and away from lamb, journalism and
egg-hot.

moschus was, as we have seen, robert lovell. no. v. of _the watchman_
contained sonnets by him.

the review of burke's _letter to a noble lord_ was in no. i. of _the
watchman._--the passage from "religious musings," under the title "the
present state of society," was in no. ii.--extending from line 260 to
357. [these lines were 279-378 1st ed.; 264-363 2nd ed.] the capital
line in no. vi. is in the poem, "lines on observing a blossom on the
first of february, 1796."--poor dead parsons would be william parsons
(1736-1795), the original sir fretful plagiary in sheridan's "critic."
lamb praises him in his essay on the artificial comedy.--in no. ix. of
_the watchman_ were prose paraphrases of three sclavonian songs, the
first being "song of a female orphan," and the second, "song of the
haymakers."--john logan's "braes of yarrow" had been quoted in no. iii.
as "the most exquisite performance in our language."--the invective
against "the barterers" refers to the denunciation of the slave trade in
no. iv. of _the watchman_.

cowper's recovery was only partial; and he was never rightly himself
after 1793. the edition of milton had been begun about 1790. it was
never finished as originally intended; but fuseli completed forty
pictures, which were exhibited in 1799. an edition of cowper's
translations, with designs by flaxman, was published in 1808, and of
cowper's complete milton in 1810.

wordsworth's poem would be "guilt and sorrow," of which a portion was
printed in _lyrical ballads,_ 1798, and the whole published in 1842.

coleridge's "monody on chatterton," the first poem in his _poems on
various subjects_, 1796, had been written originally at christ's
hospital, 1790: it continued to be much altered before the final
version.

the two lines from "religious musings" are not the last, but the
beginning of the last passage.

coleridge contributed between three and four hundred lines to book ii.
of southey's _joan of arc_, as we shall see later. the poem beginning
"my pensive sara" was effusion 35, afterwards called "the aeolian harp,"
and the lines to which lamb refers are these, following upon coleridge's
description of how flitting phantasies traverse his indolent and passive
brain:--

but thy more serious eye a mild reproof
darts, o beloved woman! nor such thoughts
dim and unhallow'd dost thou not reject,
and biddest me walk humbly with my god.

the plan to resume _the watchman_ did not come to anything.

joseph priestley (1733-1804), the theologian, at this time the object of
lamb's adoration, was one of the fathers of unitarianism, a creed in
which lamb had been brought up under the influence of his aunt hetty.
coleridge, as a supporter of one of priestley's allies, william frend of
cambridge, and as a convinced unitarian, was also an admirer of
priestley, concerning whom and the birmingham riots of 1791 is a fine
passage in "religious musings," while one of the sonnets of the 1796
volume was addressed to him: circumstances which lamb had in mind when
mentioning him in this letter. lamb had probably seen priestley at the
gravel pit chapel, hackney, where he became morning preacher in
december, 1791, remaining there until march, 1794. thenceforward he
lived in america. his _institutes of natural and revealed religion_
appeared between 1772 and 1774. the other work referred to is _letters
to the philosophers and politicians of france_, newly edited by
theophilus lindsey, the unitarian, as _an answer to mr. paine's "age of
reason_," 1795.]




letter 3


charles lamb to s.t. coleridge

[begun wednesday, june 8. dated on address: "friday 10th june," 1796.]

with joan of arc i have been delighted, amazed. i had not presumed to
expect any thing of such excellence from southey. why the poem is alone
sufficient to redeem the character of the age we live in from the
imputation of degenerating in poetry, were there no such beings extant
as burns and bowles, cowper and----fill up the blank how you please, i
say nothing. the subject is well chosen. it opens well. to become more
particular, i will notice in their order a few passages that chiefly
struck me on perusal. page 26 "fierce and terrible benevolence!" is a
phrase full of grandeur and originality. the whole context made me feel
_possess'd_, even like joan herself. page 28, "it is most horrible with
the keen sword to gore the finely fibred human frame" and what follows
pleased me mightily. in the 2d book the first forty lines, in
particular, are majestic and high-sounding. indeed the whole vision of
the palace of ambition and what follows are supremely excellent. your
simile of the laplander "by niemi's lake or balda zhiok, or the mossy
stone of solfar kapper"--will bear comparison with any in milton for
fullness of circumstance and lofty-pacedness of versification. southey's
similes, tho' many of 'em are capital, are all inferior. in one of his
books the simile of the oak in the storm occurs i think four times! to
return, the light in which you view the heathen deities is accurate and
beautiful. southey's personifications in this book are so many fine and
faultless pictures. i was much pleased with your manner of accounting
for the reason why monarchs take delight in war. at the 447th line you
have placed prophets and enthusiasts cheek by jowl, on too intimate a
footing for the dignity of the former. necessarian-like-speaking it is
correct. page 98 "dead is the douglas, cold thy warrior frame,
illustrious buchan" &c are of kindred excellence with gray's "cold is
cadwallo's tongue" &c. how famously the maid baffles the doctors,
seraphic and irrefragable, "with all their trumpery!" 126 page, the
procession, the appearances of the maid, of the bastard son of orleans
and of tremouille, are full of fire and fancy, and exquisite melody of
versification. the personifications from line 303 to 309 in the heat of
the battle had better been omitted, they are not very striking and only
encumber. the converse which joan and conrade hold on the banks of the
loire is altogether beautiful. page 313, the conjecture that in dreams
"all things are that seem" is one of those conceits which the poet
delights to admit into his creed--a creed, by the way, more marvellous
and mystic than ever athanasius dream'd of. page 315, i need only
_mention_ those lines ending with "she saw a serpent gnawing at her
heart"!!! they are good imitative lines "he toild and toild, of toil to
reap no end, but endless toil and never ending woe." 347 page, cruelty
is such as hogarth might have painted her. page 361, all the passage
about love (where he seems to confound conjugal love with creating and
preserving love) is very confused and sickens me with a load of useless
personifications. else that 9th book is the finest in the volume, an
exquisite combination of the ludicrous and the terrible,--i have never
read either, even in translation, but such as i conceive to be the
manner of dante and ariosto. the 10th book is the most languid. on the
whole, considering the celerity wherewith the poem was finish'd, i was
astonish'd at the infrequency of weak lines. i had expected to find it
verbose. joan, i think, does too little in battle--dunois, perhaps, the
same--conrade too much. the anecdotes interspersed among the battles
refresh the mind very agreeably, and i am delighted with the very many
passages of simple pathos abounding throughout the poem--passages which
the author of "crazy kate" might have written. has not master southey
spoke very slightingly in his preface and disparagingly of cowper's
homer?--what makes him reluctant to give cowper his fame? and does not
southey use too often the expletives "did" and "does"? they have a good
effect at times, but are too inconsiderable, or rather become blemishes,
when they mark a style. on the whole, i expect southey one day to rival
milton. i already deem him equal to cowper, and superior to all living
poets besides. what says coleridge? the "monody on henderson" is
_immensely good_; the rest of that little volume is _readable and above
mediocrity_. i proceed to a more pleasant task,--pleasant because the
poems are yours, pleasant because you impose the task on me, and
pleasant, let me add, because it will confer a whimsical importance on
me to sit in judgment upon your rhimes. first tho', let me thank you
again and again in my own and my sister's name for your invitations.
nothing could give us more pleasure than to come, but (were there no
other reasons) while my brother's leg is so bad it is out of the
question. poor fellow, he is very feverish and light headed, but
cruikshanks has pronounced the symptoms favorable, and gives us every
hope that there will be no need of amputation. god send, not. we are
necessarily confined with him the afternoon and evening till very late,
so that i am stealing a few minutes to write to you. thank you for your
frequent letters, you are the only correspondent and i might add the
only friend i have in the world. i go no where and have no acquaintance.
slow of speech, and reserved of manners, no one seeks or cares for my
society and i am left alone. allen calls only occasionally, as tho' it
were a duty rather, and seldom stays ten minutes. then judge how
thankful i am for your letters. do not, however, burthen yourself with
the correspondence. i trouble you again so soon, only in obedience to
your injunctions. complaints apart, proceed we to our task. i am called
away to tea, thence must wait upon my brother, so must delay till
to-morrow. farewell--wednesday.

thursday. i will first notice what is new to me. 13th page. "the
thrilling tones that concentrate the soul" is a nervous line, and the 6
first lines of page 14 are very pretty. the 21st effusion a perfect
thing. that in the manner of spencer is very sweet, particularly at the
close. the 35th effusion is most exquisite--that line in particular,
"and tranquil muse upon tranquillity." it is the very reflex pleasure
that distinguishes the tranquillity of a thinking being from that of a
shepherd--a modern one i would be understood to mean--a dametas; one
that keeps other people's sheep. certainly, coleridge, your letter from
shurton bars has less merit than most things in your volume; personally,
it may chime in best with your own feelings, and therefore you love it
best. it has however great merit. in your 4th epistle that is an
exquisite paragraph and fancy-full of "a stream there is which rolls in
lazy flow" &c. &c. "murmurs sweet undersong 'mid jasmine bowers" is a
sweet line and so are the 3 next. the concluding simile is far-fetch'd.
"tempest-honord" is a quaint-ish phrase. of the monody on h., i will
here only notice these lines, as superlatively excellent. that energetic
one, "shall i not praise thee, scholar, christian, friend," like to that
beautiful climax of shakspeare "king, hamlet, royal dane, father." "yet
memory turns from little men to thee!" "and sported careless round their
fellow child." the whole, i repeat it, is immensely good. yours is a
poetical family. i was much surpriz'd and pleased to see the signature
of sara to that elegant composition, the 5th epistle. i dare not
_criticise_ the relig musings, i like not to _select_ any part where all
is excellent. i can only admire; and thank you for it in the name of a
christian as well as a lover of good poetry. only let me ask, is not
that thought and those words in young, "stands in the sun"? or is it
only such as young in one of his _better moments_ might have writ?
"believe, thou, o my soul, life is a vision, shadowy of truth, and vice
and anguish and the wormy grave, shapes of a dream!" i thank you for
these lines, in the name of a necessarian, and for what follows in next
paragraph in the name of a child of fancy. after all you can[not] nor
ever will write any thing, with which i shall be so delighted as what i
have heard yourself repeat. you came to town, and i saw you at a time
when your heart was yet bleeding with recent wounds. like yourself, i
was sore galled with disappointed hope. you had "many an holy lay, that
mourning, soothed the mourner on his way." i had ears of sympathy to
drink them in, and they yet vibrate pleasant on the sense. when i read
in your little volume, your 19th effusion, or the 28th or 29th, or what
you call the "sigh," i think i hear _you_ again. i image to myself the
little smoky room at the salutation and cat, where we have sat together
thro' the winter nights, beguiling the cares of life with poesy. when
you left london, i felt a dismal void in my heart, i found myself cut
off at one and the same time from two most dear to me. "how blest with
ye the path could i have trod of quiet life." in your conversation you
had blended so many pleasant fancies, that they cheated me of my grief.
but in your absence, the tide of melancholy rushd in again, and did its
worst mischief by overwhelming my reason. i have recoverd. but feel a
stupor that makes me indifferent to the hopes and fears of this life. i
sometimes wish to introduce a religious turn of mind, but habits are
strong things, and my religious fervors are confined alas to some
fleeting moments of occasional solitary devotion--a correspondence,
opening with you, has roused me a little from my lethargy, and made me
conscious of existence. indulge me in it. i will not be very
troublesome. at some future time i will amuse you with an account as
full as my memory will permit of the strange turn my phrensy took. i
look back upon it at times with a gloomy kind of envy. for while it
lasted i had many many hours of pure happiness. dream not coleridge, of
having tasted all the grandeur and wildness of fancy, till you have gone
mad. all now seems to me vapid; comparatively so. excuse this selfish
digression.

your monody is so superlatively excellent, that i can only wish it
perfect, which i can't help feeling it is not quite. indulge me in a few
conjectures. what i am going to propose would make it more compress'd
and i think more energic, tho' i am sensible at the expence of many
beautiful lines. let it begin "is this the land of song-ennobled line,"
and proceed to "otway's famish'd form." then "thee chatterton," to
"blaze of seraphim." then "clad in nature's rich array," to "orient
day;" then "but soon the scathing lightning," to "blighted land." then
"sublime of thought" to "his bosom glows." then "but soon upon _his_
poor unsheltered head did penury her sickly mildew shed, and soon are
fled the charms of vernal grace, and joy's wild gleams that lightend
o'er his face!" then "youth of tumultuous soul" to "sigh" as before. the
rest may all stand down to "gaze upon the waves below." what follows now
may come next, as detached verses, suggested by the monody, rather than
a part of it. they are indeed in themselves very sweet "and we at sober
eve would round thee throng, hanging enraptured on thy stately song"--in
particular perhaps. if i am obscure you may understand me by counting
lines. i have proposed omitting 24 lines. i feel that thus comprest it
would gain energy, but think it most likely you will not agree with me,
for who shall go about to bring opinions to the bed of procrustes and
introduce among the sons of men a monotony of identical feelings. i only
propose with diffidence. reject, you, if you please, with as little
remorse as you would the color of a coat or the pattern of a buckle
where our fancies differ'd. the lines "friend to the friendless" &c.
which you may think "rudely disbranched" from the chatterton will patch
in with the man of ross, where they were once quite at home, with 2 more
which i recollect "and o'er the dowried virgin's snowy cheek bad bridal
love suffuse his blushes meek!" very beautiful. the pixies is a perfect
thing, and so are the lines on the spring, page 28. the epitaph on an
infant, like a jack of lanthorn, has danced about (or like dr. forster's
scholars) out of the morn chron into the watchman, and thence back into
your collection. it is very pretty, and you seem to think so, but, may
be o'er looked its chief merit, that of filling up a whole page. i had
once deemd sonnets of unrivalled use that way, but your epitaphs, i
find, are the more diffuse. edmund still holds its place among your best
verses. "ah! fair delights" to "roses round" in your poem called absence
recall (none more forcibly) to my mind the tones in which _you recited
it_. i will not notice in this tedious (to you) manner verses which have
been so long delightful to me, and which you already know my opinion of.
of this kind are bowles, priestly, and that most exquisite and most
bowles-like of all, the 19th effusion. it would have better ended with
"agony of care." the last 2 lines are obvious and unnecessary and you
need not now make 14 lines of it, now it is rechristend from a sonnet to
an effusion. schiller might have written the 20 effusion. 'tis worthy of
him in any sense. i was glad to meet with those lines you sent me, when
my sister was so ill. i had lost the copy, and i felt not a little proud
at seeing my name in your verse. the complaint of ninathoma (1st stanza
in particular) is the best, or only good imitation, of ossian i ever
saw--your restless gale excepted. "to an infant" is most sweet--is not
"foodful," tho', very harsh! would not "dulcet" fruit be less harsh, or
some other friendly bi-syllable? in edmund, "frenzy fierce-eyed child,"
is not so well as frantic--tho' that is an epithet adding nothing to the
meaning. slander _couching_ was better than squatting. in the man of
ross it _was_ a better line thus "if 'neath this roof thy wine-chear'd
moments pass" than as it stands now. time nor nothing can reconcile me
to the concluding 5 lines of kosciusko: call it any thing you will but
sublime. in my 12th effusion i had rather have seen what i wrote myself,
tho' they bear no comparison with your exquisite lines "on rose-leaf'd
beds amid your faery bowers," &c.--i love my sonnets because they are
the reflected images of my own feelings at different times. to instance,
in the 13th "how reason reel'd," &c.--are good lines but must spoil the
whole with me who know it is only a fiction of yours and that the rude
dashings did in fact not rock me to repose, i grant the same objection
applies not to the former sonnet, but still i love my own feelings. they
are dear to memory, tho' they now and then wake a sigh or a tear.
"thinking on divers things foredone," i charge you, col., spare my ewe
lambs, and tho' a gentleman may borrow six lines in an epic poem (i
should have no objection to borrow 500 and without acknowledging) still
in a sonnet--a personal poem--i do not "ask my friend the aiding verse."
i would not wrong your feelings by proposing any improvements (did i
think myself capable of suggesting 'em) in such personal poems as "thou
bleedest my poor heart"--'od so, i am catchd, i have already done
it--but that simile i propose abridging would not change the feeling or
introduce any alien ones. do you understand me? in the 28th however, and
in the "sigh" and that composed at clevedon, things that come from the
heart direct, not by the medium of the fancy, i would not suggest an
alteration. when my blank verse is finished, or any long fancy poems,
"_propino tibi alterandum, cut-up-andum, abridg-andum_," just what you
will with it--but spare my ewe lambs! that to mrs. siddons now you were
welcome to improve, if it had been worth it. but i say unto you again,
col., spare my ewe lambs. i must confess were they mine i should omit,
in editione secunda, effusions 2-3, because satiric, and below the
dignity of the poet of religious musings, 5-7, half of the 8th, that
written in early youth, as far as "thousand eyes,"--tho' i part not
unreluctantly with that lively line "chaste joyance dancing in her
bright-blue eyes" and one or 2 more just thereabouts. but i would
substitute for it that sweet poem called "recollection" in the 5th no.
of the watchman, better i think than the remainder of this poem, tho'
not differing materially. as the poem now stands it looks altogether
confused. and do not omit those lines upon the "early blossom," in your
6th no. of the watchman, and i would omit the 10th effusion--or what
would do better, alter and improve the last 4 lines. in fact, i suppose
if they were mine i should _not_ omit 'em. but your verse is for the
most part so exquisite, that i like not to see aught of meaner matter
mixed with it. forgive my petulance and often, i fear, ill founded
criticisms, and forgive me that i have, by this time, made your eyes and
head ach with my long letter. but i cannot forego hastily the pleasure
and pride of thus conversing with you.

you did not tell me whether i was to include the conciones ad populum in
my remarks on your poems. they are not unfrequently sublime, and i think
you could not do better than to turn 'em into verse,--if you have
nothing else to do. allen i am sorry to say is a _confirmed_ atheist.
stodart, or stothard, a cold hearted well bred conceited disciple of
godwin, does him no good. his wife has several daughters (one of 'em as
old as himself). surely there is something unnatural in such a marriage.
how i sympathise with you on the dull duty of a reviewer, and heartily
damn with you ned evans and the prosodist. i shall however wait
impatiently for the articles in the crit. rev., next month, because they
are _yours_. young evans (w. evans, a branch of a family you were once
so intimate with) is come into our office, and sends his love to you.
coleridge, i devoutly wish that fortune, who has made sport with you so
long, may play one freak more, throw you into london, or some spot near
it, and there snug-ify you for life. 'tis a selfish but natural wish for
me, cast as i am "on life's wide plain, friend-less." are you acquainted
with bowles? i see, by his last elegy (written at bath), you are near
neighbours. "and i can think i can see the groves again--was it the
voice of thee--twas not the voice of thee, my buried friend--who dries
with her dark locks the tender tear"--are touches as true to nature as
any in his other elegy, written at the hot wells, about poor russell,
&c.--you are doubtless acquainted with it.--thursday.

i do not know that i entirely agree with you in your stricture upon my
sonnet to innocence. to men whose hearts are not quite deadened by their
commerce with the world, innocence (no longer familiar) becomes an awful
idea. so i felt when i wrote it. your other censures (qualified and
sweeten'd, tho', with praises somewhat extravagant) i perfectly coincide
with. yet i chuse to retain the word "lunar"--indulge a "lunatic" in his
loyalty to his mistress the moon. i have just been reading a most
pathetic copy of verses on sophia pringle, who was hanged and burn'd for
coining. one of the strokes of pathos (which are very many, all somewhat
obscure) is "she lifted up her guilty forger to heaven." a note explains
by forger her right hand with which she forged or coined the base metal!
for pathos read bathos. you have put me out of conceit with my blank
verse by your religious musings. i think it will come to nothing. i do
not like 'em enough to send 'em. i have just been reading a book, which
i may be too partial to, as it was the delight of my childhood; but i
will recommend it to you--it is "izaak walton's complete angler!" all
the scientific part you may omit in reading. the dialogue is very
simple, full of pastoral beauties, and will charm you. many pretty old
verses are interspersed. this letter, which would be a week's work
reading only, i do not wish you to answer in less than a month. i shall
be richly content with a letter from you some day early in july--tho' if
you get any how _settled_ before then pray let me know it immediately--
'twould give me such satisfaction. concerning the unitarian chapel, the
salary is the only scruple that the most rigid moralist would admit as
valid. concerning the tutorage--is not the salary low, and absence from
your family unavoidable? london is the only fostering soil for genius.

nothing more occurs just now, so i will leave you in mercy one small
white spot empty below, to repose your eyes upon, fatigued as they must
be with the wilderness of words they have by this time painfully
travell'd thro'. god love you, coleridge, and prosper you thro' life,
tho' mine will be loss if your lot is to be cast at bristol or at
nottingham or any where but london. our loves to mrs. c--.

c. l.

[southey's _joan of arc_, with contributions to book ii. by coleridge,
had been published in quarto by cottle. coleridge contributed to book
ii. the first 450 lines, with the exception of 141-143, 148-222, 266-272
and 286-291. he subsequently took out his lines and gave them new shape
as the poem "the destiny of nations," printed in _sibylline leaves_,
1817. all subsequent editions of southey's poem appeared without
coleridge's portion. the passages on page 26 and page 28 were southey's.
those at the beginning of the second book were coleridge's. the simile
of the laplander may be read in "the destiny of nations" (lines 63-79).
these were the reasons given by coleridge for monarchs making war:--

when luxury and lust's exhausted stores
no more can rouse the appetites of kings;
when the low flattery of their reptile lords
falls flat and heavy on the accustomed ear;
when eunuchs sing, and fools buffoon'ry make.
and dancers writhe their harlot limbs in vain:
then war and all its dread vicissitudes
pleasingly agitate their stagnant hearts....

the 447th line was coleridge's. this is the passage:--

whether thy law with unrefracted ray
beam on the prophet's purged eye, or if
diseasing realms the enthusiast, wild of thought,
scatter new frenzies on the infected throng,
thou, both inspiring and foredooming, both
fit instruments and best of perfect end.

with page 98 we come to southey again, the remaining references being to
him. the maid baffles the doctors in book iii.; page 126 is in book iv.;
the personifications are in book vi.; the converse between joan and
conrade is in book iv.; page 313 is at the beginning of book ix.; and
pages 315, 347 and 361 are also in book ix. southey in the preface to
_joan of arc_, speaking of homer, says: "pope has disguised him in
fop-finery and cowper has stripped him naked." "crazy kate" is an
episode in _the task_ ("the sofa").

the "monody on john henderson," by joseph cottle, was printed
anonymously in a volume of poems in 1795, and again in _the malvern
hill_. john henderson (1757-1788) was an eccentric scholar of bristol.
the lines praised by lamb are the 4th, 12th and 14th. the poem must not
be confused with the monody on henderson, the actor, by g. d. harley.

lamb now turns again to coleridge's _poems_. the poem on the 13th and
14th pages of this little volume was "to the rev. w. j. h." the 21st
effusion was that entitled "composed while climbing the left ascent of
brockley coomb." the 35th effusion is known as "the aeolian harp." the
letter from shurton bars is the poem beginning--

        nor travels my meand'ring eye.

the 4th epistle is that to joseph cottle, coleridge's publisher and the
author of the "monody on henderson," referred to in coleridge's verses.
the lines which lamb quotes are cottle's. the poem by sara coleridge is
"the silver thimble." the passage in the "religious musings," for which
lamb is thankful as a "child of fancy," is the last paragraph:--

contemplant spirits! ye that hover o'er
with untired gaze the immeasurable fount
ebullient with creative deity!
and ye of plastic power, that interfused
roll through the grosser and material mass
in organising surge! holies of god!
(and what if monads of the infinite mind?)
i haply journeying my immortal course
shall sometime join your mystic choir!
        till then
i discipline my young noviciate thought
in ministeries of heart-stirring song,
and aye on meditation's heaven-ward wing
soaring aloft i breathe the empyreal air
of love, omnific, omnipresent love,
whose day-spring rises glorious in my soul
as the great sun, when he his influence
sheds on the frost-bound waters--the glad stream
flows to the ray and warbles as it flows.

"you came to town ..." soon after his engagement with sara fricker, his
heart being still not wholly healed of its passion for mary evans,
coleridge had gone to london from bristol, nominally to arrange for the
publication of his _fall of robespierre_, and had resumed intercourse
with lamb and other old christ's hospital friends. there he remained
until southey forcibly took him back in january, 1795. from what lamb
says of the loss of two friends we must suppose, in default of other
information, that he had to give up his anna at the same time. the loss
of reason, however, to which he refers did not come until the end of the
year 1795.

the 19th effusion, afterwards called "on a discovery made too late;" the
28th, "the kiss;" the 29th, "imitated from ossian."

"your monody." this, not to be confounded with cottle's "monody on
henderson," was coleridge's "monody on chatterton." lamb's emendations
were not accepted. as regards "the man of ross," the couplet beginning
"friend to the friendless" ultimately had a place both in that poem and
in the monody, but the couplet "and o'er the dowried virgin" was never
replaced in either. the lines on spring, page 28, are "lines to a
beautiful spring." dr. forster (faustus) was the hero of the nursery
rhyme, whose scholars danced out of england into france and spain and
back again. the epitaph on an infant was in _the watchman_, no. ix. (see
note on page 62). the poem "edmund" is called "lines on a friend who
died of a frenzy fever induced by calumnious reports." the lines in
"absence" are those in the second stanza of the poem. they run thus:--

ah fair delights! that o'er my soul
on memory's wing, like shadows fly!
ah flowers! which joy from eden stole
while innocence stood smiling by!--
but cease, fond heart! this bootless moan:
those hours on rapid pinions flown
shall yet return, by absence crowned,
and scatter livelier roses round.

the 19th effusion, beginning "thou bleedest, my poor heart," is known as
"on a discovery made too late." the 20th effusion is the sonnet to
schiller. the lines which were sent to lamb, written in december, 1794,
are called "to a friend, together with an unfinished poem" ("religious
musings"). coleridge's "restless gale" is the imitation of ossian,
beginning, "the stream with languid murmur creeps." "foodful" occurs
thus in the lines "to an infant":--

alike the foodful fruit and scorching fire
awake thy eager grasp and young desire.

coleridge did not alter the phrase.

lamb contributed four effusions to this volume of coleridge's: the 7th,
to mrs. siddons (written in conjunction with coleridge), the 11th, 12th
and 13th. all were signed c. l. coleridge had permitted himself to make
various alterations. the following parallel will show the kind of
treatment to which lamb objected:--

lamb's original effusion (11)

was it some sweet device of faery
that mock'd my steps with many a lonely glade,
and fancied wanderings with a fair-hair'd maid?
have these things been? or what rare witchery,
impregning with delights the charmed air,
enlighted up the semblance of a smile
in those fine eyes? methought they spake the while
soft soothing things, which might enforce despair
to drop the murdering knife, and let go by
his foul resolve. and does the lonely glade
still court the foot-steps of the fair-hair'd maid?
still in her locks the gales of summer sigh?
while i forlorn do wander reckless where,
and 'mid my wanderings meet no anna there.

as altered by coleridge

was it some sweet device of faery land
that mock'd my steps with many a lonely glade,
and fancied wand'rings with a fair-hair'd maid?
have these things been? or did the wizard wand
of merlin wave, impregning vacant air,
and kindle up the vision of a smile
in those blue eyes, that seem'd to speak the while
such tender things, as might enforce despair
to drop the murth'ring knife, and let go by
his fell resolve? ah me! the lonely glade
still courts the footsteps of the fair-hair'd maid,
among whose locks the west-winds love to sigh:
but i forlorn do wander, reckless where,
and mid my wand'rings find no anna there!

in effusion 12 lamb had written:--

or we might sit and tell some tender tale
of faithful vows repaid by cruel scorn,
   a tale of true love, or of friend forgot;
and i would teach thee, lady, how to rail
   in gentle sort, on those who practise not
or love or pity, though of woman born.

coleridge made it:--

but ah! sweet scenes of fancied bliss, adieu!
on rose-leaf beds amid your faery bowers
i all too long have lost the dreamy hours!
beseems it now the sterner muse to woo,
if haply she her golden meed impart
to realize the vision of the heart.

again in the 13th effusion, "written at midnight, by the sea-side, after
a voyage," lamb had dotted out the last two lines. coleridge substituted
the couplet:--

how reason reel'd! what gloomy transports rose!
till the rude dashings rock'd them to repose.

effusion 2, which lamb would omit, was the sonnet "to burke;" effusion
3, "to mercy" (on pitt); effusion 5, "to erskine;" effusion 7, lamb and
coleridge's joint sonnet, "to mrs. siddons;" and effusion 8, "to
koskiusko." the "lines written in early youth" were afterwards called
"lines on an autumnal evening." the poem called "recollection," in _the
watchman_, was reborn as "sonnet to the river otter." the lines on the
early blossom were praised by lamb in a previous letter. the 10th
effusion was the sonnet to earl stanhope.

godwin was william godwin, the philosopher. we shall later see much of
him. it was allen's wife, not stoddart's, who had a grown-up daughter.

_ned evans_ was a novel in four volumes, published in 1796, an imitation
of _tom jones_, which presumably coleridge was reviewing for the
_critical review_.

young w. evans is said by mr. dykes campbell to have been the only son
of the mrs. evans who befriended coleridge when he was at christ's
hospital, the mother of his first love, mary evans. evans was at school
with coleridge and lamb. we shall meet with him again.

william lisle bowles (1762-1850), the sonneteer, who had exerted so
powerful a poetical influence on coleridge's mind, was at this time
rector of cricklade in wiltshire (1792-1797), but had been ill at bath.
the elegy in question was "elegiac stanzas written during sickness at
bath, december, 1795." the lines quoted by lamb are respectively in the
6th, 4th, 5th and 19th stanzas.

sophia pringle. probably the subject of a catnach or other popular
broadside. i have not found it.

izaak walton. lamb returns to praises of _the compleat angler_ in his
letter to robert lloyd referred to on page 215.

the reference to the unitarian chapel bears probably upon an offer of a
pulpit to coleridge. the tutorship was probably that offered to
coleridge by mrs. evans of darley hall (no relation to mary evans) who
wished him to teach her sons. neither project was carried through.]




letter 4


(_apparently a continuation of a letter the first part of which is
missing_)

charles lamb to s. t. coleridge
[begun] monday night [june 13, 1796].

unfurnished at present with any sheet-filling subject, i shall continue
my letter gradually and journal-wise. my second thoughts entirely
coincide with your comments on "joan of arc," and i can only wonder at
my childish judgment which overlooked the 1st book and could prefer the
9th: not that i was insensible to the soberer beauties of the former,
but the latter caught me with its glare of magic,--the former, however,
left a more pleasing general recollection in my mind. let me add, the
1st book was the favourite of my sister--and _i_ now, with joan, often
"think on domremi and the fields of arc." i must not pass over without
acknowledging my obligations to your full and satisfactory account of
personifications. i have read it again and again, and it will be a guide
to my future taste. perhaps i had estimated southey's merits too much by
number, weight, and measure. i now agree completely and entirely in your
opinion of the genius of southey. your own image of melancholy is
illustrative of what you teach, and in itself masterly. i conjecture it
is "disbranched" from one of your embryo "hymns." when they are mature
of birth (were i you) i should print 'em in one separate volume, with
"religious musings" and your part of the "joan of arc." birds of the
same soaring wing should hold on their flight in company. once for all
(and by renewing the subject you will only renew in me the condemnation
of tantalus), i hope to be able to pay you a visit (if you are then at
bristol) some time in the latter end of august or beginning of september
for a week or fortnight; before that time, office business puts an
absolute veto on my coming.

    "and if a sigh that speaks regret of happier times appear,
    a glimpse of joy that we have met shall shine and dry the tear."

of the blank verses i spoke of, the following lines are the only
tolerably complete ones i have writ out of not more than one hundred and
fifty. that i get on so slowly you may fairly impute to want of practice
in composition, when i declare to you that (the few verses which you
have seen excepted) i have not writ fifty lines since i left school. it
may not be amiss to remark that my grandmother (on whom the verses are
written) lived housekeeper in a family the fifty or sixty last years of
her life--that she was a woman of exemplary piety and goodness--and for
many years before her death was terribly afflicted with a cancer in her
breast which she bore with true christian patience. you may think that i
have not kept enough apart the ideas of her heavenly and her earthly
master but recollect i have designedly given in to her own way of
feeling--and if she had a failing, 'twas that she respected her master's
family too much, not reverenced her maker too little. the lines begin
imperfectly, as i may probably connect 'em if i finish at all,--and if i
do, biggs shall print 'em in a more economical way than you yours, for
(sonnets and all) they won't make a thousand lines as i propose
completing 'em, and the substance must be wire-drawn.

tuesday evening, june 14, 1796.

i am not quite satisfied now with the chatterton, and with your leave
will try my hand at it again. a master joiner, you know, may leave a
cabinet to be finished, when his own hands are full. to your list of
illustrative personifications, into which a fine imagination enters, i
will take leave to add the following from beaumont and fletcher's "wife
for a month;" 'tis the conclusion of a description of a sea-fight;--"the
game of _death_ was never played so nobly; the meagre thief grew wanton
in his mischiefs, and his shrunk hollow eyes smiled on his ruins." there
is fancy in these of a lower order from "bonduca;"--"then did i see
these valiant men of britain, like boding owls creep into tods of ivy,
and hoot their fears to one another nightly." not that it is a
personification; only it just caught my eye in a little extract book i
keep, which is full of quotations from b. and f. in particular, in which
authors i can't help thinking there is a greater richness of poetical
fancy than in any one, shakspeare excepted. are you acquainted with
massinger? at a hazard i will trouble you with a passage from a play of
his called "a very woman." the lines are spoken by a lover (disguised)
to his faithless mistress. you will remark the fine effect of the double
endings. you will by your ear distinguish the lines, for i write 'em as
prose. "not far from where my father lives, _a lady_, a neighbour by,
blest with as great a _beauty_ as nature durst bestow without _undoing_,
dwelt, and most happily, as i thought then, and blest the house a
thousand times she _dwelt in_. this beauty, in the blossom of my youth,
when my first fire knew no adulterate _incense_, nor i no way to flatter
but my _fondness_; in all the bravery my friends could _show me_, in all
the faith my innocence could _give me_, in the best language my true
tongue could _tell me_, and all the broken sighs my sick heart _lend
me_, i sued and served; long did i serve this _lady_, long was my
travail, long my trade to _win her_; with all the duty of my soul i
served her." "then she must love." "she did, but never me: she could not
_love me_; she would not love, she hated,--more, she _scorn'd me_; and
in so poor and base a way _abused me_ for all my services, for all my
_bounties_, so bold neglects flung on me."--"what out of love, and
worthy love, i _gave her_ (shame to her most unworthy mind,) to fools,
to girls, to fiddlers and her boys she flung, all in disdain of me." one
more passage strikes my eye from b. and f.'s "palamon and arcite." one
of 'em complains in prison: "this is all our world; we shall know
nothing here but one another, hear nothing but the clock that tells our
woes; the vine shall grow, but we shall never see it," &c. is not the
last circumstance exquisite? i mean not to lay myself open by saying
they exceed milton, and perhaps collins, in sublimity. but don't you
conceive all poets after shakspeare yield to 'em in variety of genius?
massinger treads close on their heels; but you are most probably as well
acquainted with his writings as your humble servant. my quotations, in
that case, will only serve to expose my barrenness of matter. southey in
simplicity and tenderness, is excelled decidedly only, i think, by
beaumont and f. in his [their] "maid's tragedy" and some parts of
"philaster" in particular, and elsewhere occasionally; and perhaps by
cowper in his "crazy kate," and in parts of his translation, such as the
speeches of hecuba and andromache. i long to know your opinion of that
translation. the odyssey especially is surely very homeric. what nobler
than the appearance of phoebus at the beginning of the iliad--the lines
ending with "dread sounding, bounding on the silver bow!"

i beg you will give me your opinion of the translation; it afforded me
high pleasure. as curious a specimen of translation as ever fell into my
hands, is a young man's in our office, of a french novel. what in the
original was literally "amiable delusions of the fancy," he proposed to
render "the fair frauds of the imagination!" i had much trouble in
licking the book into any meaning at all. yet did the knave clear fifty
or sixty pounds by subscription and selling the copyright. the book
itself not a week's work! to-day's portion of my journalising epistle
has been very dull and poverty-stricken. i will here end.

tuesday night.

i have been drinking egg-hot and smoking oronooko (associated
circumstances, which ever forcibly recall to my mind our evenings and
nights at the salutation); my eyes and brain are heavy and asleep, but
my heart is awake; and if words came as ready as ideas, and ideas as
feelings, i could say ten hundred kind things. coleridge, you know not
my supreme happiness at having one on earth (though counties separate
us) whom i can call a friend. remember you those tender lines of
logan?--

"our broken friendships we deplore,
and loves of youth that are no more;
no after friendships e'er can raise
th' endearments of our early days,
and ne'er the heart such fondness prove,
as when we first began to love."

i am writing at random, and half-tipsy, what you may not _equally_
understand, as you will be sober when you read it; but _my_ sober and
_my_ half-tipsy hours you are alike a sharer in. good night.

"then up rose our bard, like a prophet in drink,
craigdoroch, thou'lt soar when creation shall sink."

burns.

_thursday_ [june 16, 1796].

i am now in high hopes to be able to visit you, if perfectly convenient
on your part, by the end of next month--perhaps the last week or
fortnight in july. a change of scene and a change of faces would do me
good, even if that scene were not to be bristol, and those faces
coleridge's and his friends. in the words of terence, a little altered,
"taedet me hujus quotidiani mundi." i am heartily sick of the every-day
scenes of life. i shall half wish you unmarried (don't show this to mrs.
c.) for one evening only, to have the pleasure of smoking with you, and
drinking egg-hot in some little smoky room in a pot-house, for i know
not yet how i shall like you in a decent room, and looking quite happy.
my best love and respects to sara notwithstanding.

                                  yours sincerely,
                                     charles lamb.

[coleridge's image of melancholy will be found in the lines
"melancholy--a fragment." it was published in _sibylline leaves_, 1817,
and in a note coleridge said that the verses were printed in the
_morning chronicle_ in 1794. they were really printed in the _morning
post_, december 12, 1797. coleridge had probably sent them to lamb in
ms. the "hymns" came to nothing.

"the following lines." lamb's poem "the grandame" was presumably
included in this letter. see vol. iv. mary field, lamb's grandmother,
died july 31, 1792, aged seventy-nine, and was buried in widford
churchyard. she had been for many years housekeeper in the plumer family
at blakesware. on william plumer's moving to gilston, a neighbouring
seat, in 1767, she had sole charge of the blakesware mansion, where her
grandchildren used to visit her. compare lamb's _elia_ essays
"blakesmoor in h----shire" and "dream-children,"

n. biggs was the printer of coleridge's _poems_, 1797.

lamb had begun his amendment of coleridge's "monody on the death of
chatterton" in his letter of june 10. coleridge's illustrative
personifications, here referred to, are in that poem. the extract book
from which lamb copied his quotations from beaumont and fletcher and
massinger was, he afterwards tells us, destroyed; but similar volumes,
which he filled later, are preserved. many of his extracts he included
in his _dramatic specimens_.

writing to charles lloyd, sen., in 1809, lamb says of cowper as a
translator of homer that he "delays you ... walking over a bowling
green."

canon ainger possessed a copy of the book translated by lamb's
fellow-clerk. it was called _sentimental tablets of the good pamphile_.
"translated from the french of m. gorjy by p. s. dupuy of the east india
house, 1795." among the subscribers' names were thomas bye (5 copies),
ball, evans, savory (2 copies), and lamb himself.]




letter 5


charles lamb to s.t. coleridge

[probably begun on wednesday, june 29. p.m. july 1, 1796.]

the first moment i can come i will, but my hopes of coming yet a while
yet hang on a ticklish thread. the coach i come by is immaterial as i
shall so easily by your direction find ye out. my mother is grown so
entirely helpless (not having any use of her limbs) that mary is
necessarily confined from ever sleeping out, she being her bed fellow.
she thanks you tho' and will accompany me in spirit. most exquisite are
the lines from withers. your own lines introductory to your poem on self
run smoothly and pleasurably, and i exhort you to continue 'em. what
shall i say to your dactyls? they are what you would call good per se,
but a parody on some of 'em is just now suggesting itself, and you shall
have it rough and unlicked. i mark with figures the lines parodied.

 4.--sorely your dactyls do drag along lim'p-footed.
 5.--sad is the measure that han'gs a clod round 'em so,
 6.--meagre, and lan'guid, proclaiming its wretchedness.
 1.--weary, unsatisfied, not little sic'k of 'em.
11.--cold is my tired heart, i have no charity.
 2.--painfully trav'lling thus over the rugged road.
 7.--o begone, measure, half latin, half en'glish, then.
12.--dismal your dactyls are, god help ye, rhyming ones.

i _possibly_ may not come this fortnight--therefore all thou hast to do
is not to look for me any particular day, only to write word immediately
if at any time you quit bristol, lest i come and taffy be not at home. i
_hope_ i can come in a day or two. but young savory of my office is
suddenly taken ill in this very nick of time and i must officiate for
him till he can come to work again. had the knave gone sick and died and
putrefied at any other time, philosophy might have afforded one comfort,
but just now i have no patience with him. quarles i am as great a
stranger to as i was to withers. i wish you would try and do something
to bring our elder bards into more general fame. i writhe with
indignation when in books of criticism, where common place quotation is
heaped upon quotation, i find no mention of such men as massinger, or b.
and fl, men with whom succeeding dramatic writers (otway alone excepted)
can bear no manner of comparison. stupid knox hath noticed none of 'em
among his extracts.

thursday.--mrs. c. can scarce guess how she has gratified me by her very
kind letter and sweet little poem. i feel that i _should_ thank her in
rhyme, but she must take my acknowledgment at present in plain honest
prose. the uncertainty in which i yet stand whether i can come or no
damps my spirits, reduces me a degree below prosaical, and keeps me in a
suspense that fluctuates between hope and fear. hope is a charming,
lively, blue-eyed wench, and i am always glad of her company, but could
dispense with the visitor she brings with her, her younger sister, fear,
a white-liver'd, lilly-cheeked, bashful, palpitating, awkward hussey,
that hangs like a green girl at her sister's apronstrings, and will go
with her whithersoever _she_ goes. for the life and soul of me i could
not improve those lines in your poem on the prince and princess, so i
changed them to what you bid me and left 'em at perry's. i think 'em
altogether good, and do not see why you were sollicitous about _any_
alteration. i have not yet seen, but will make it my business to see,
to-day's _chronicle_, for your verses on horne took. dyer stanza'd him
in one of the papers t'other day, but i think unsuccessfully. tooke's
friends' meeting was i suppose a dinner of condolence. i am not sorry to
find you (for all sara) immersed in clouds of smoke and metaphysic. you
know i had a sneaking kindness for this last noble science, and you
taught me some smattering of it. i look to become no mean proficient
under your tuition. coleridge, what do you mean by saying you wrote to
me about plutarch and porphyry--i received no such letter, nor remember
a syllable of the matter, yet am not apt to forget any part of your
epistles, least of all an injunction like that. i will cast about for
'em, tho' i am a sad hand to know what books are worth, and both those
worthy gentlemen are alike out of my line. to-morrow i shall be less
suspensive and in better cue to write, so good bye at present.

friday evening.--that execrable aristocrat and knave richardson has
given me an absolute refusal of leave! the _poor man_ cannot guess at my
disappointment. is it not hard, "this dread dependance on the low bred
mind?" continue to write to me tho', and i must be content--our loves
and best good wishes attend upon you both.

lamb.

savory did return, but there are 2 or 3 more ill and absent, which was
the plea for refusing me. i will never commit my peace of mind by
depending on such a wretch for a favor in future, so shall never have
heart to ask for holidays again. the man next him in office, cartwright,
furnished him with the objections.

c. lamb.

[the dactyls were coleridge's only in the third stanza; the remainder
were southey's. the poem is known as "the soldier's wife," printed in
southey's _poems_, 1797. later southey revised the verses. _the
anti-jacobin_ had a parody of them.

young savory was probably a relative of hester savory, whom we shall
meet later. he entered the east india house on the same day that lamb
did.

we do not know what were the lines from wither which coleridge had sent
to lamb; but lamb himself eventually did much to bring him and the elder
bards into more general fame--in the _dramatic specimens_, 1808, and in
the essay "on the poetical works of george wither," in the _works_,
1818.

stupid knox was vicesimus knox (1752-1821), the editor of _elegant
extracts_ in many forms.

"her ... sweet little poem." sara coleridge's verses no longer exist.
see lamb's next letter for his poetical reply.

coleridge's poem on the prince and princess, "on a late connubial
rupture in high life," was not accepted by perry, of the _morning
chronicle_. it appeared in the _monthly magazine_, september, 1796. the
"verses addressed to j. horne tooke and the company who met on june 28,
1796, to celebrate his poll at the westminster election" were not
printed in the _morning chronicle_. tooke had opposed charles james fox,
who polled 5,160 votes, and sir alan gardner, who polled 4,814, against
his own 2,819.

dyer was george dyer (1755-1841), an old christ's hospitaller (but
before lamb and coleridge's time), of whom we shall see much--lamb's
famous "g.d."

william richardson was accountant-general of the east india house at
that time; charles cartwright, his deputy.]




letter 6


charles lamb to s.t. coleridge

the 5th july, 1796. [p.m. same date.]

to sara and her samuel

was it so hard a thing? i did but ask
a fleeting holy day. one little week,
or haply two, had bounded my request.

what if the jaded steer, who all day long
had borne the heat and labour of the plough,
when evening came and her sweet cooling hour,
should seek to trespass on a neighbour copse,
where greener herbage waved, or clearer streams
invited him to slake his burning thirst?
that man were crabbed, who should say him nay:
that man were churlish, who should drive him thence!

a blessing light upon your heads, ye good,
ye hospitable pair. i may not come,
to catch on clifden's heights the summer gale:
i may not come, a pilgrim, to the "vales
where avon winds," to taste th' inspiring waves
which shakespere drank, our british helicon:
or, with mine eye intent on redcliffe towers,
to drop a tear for that mysterious youth,
cruelly slighted, who to london walls,
in evil hour, shap'd his disastrous course.

complaints, begone; begone, ill-omen'd thoughts--
for yet again, and lo! from avon banks
another "minstrel" cometh! youth beloved,
god and good angels guide thee on thy way,
and gentler fortunes wait the friends i love.

c.l.




letter 7


charles lamb to s.t. coleridge

the 6th july [p.m. july 7, 1796].

substitute in room of that last confused & incorrect paragraph,
following the words "disastrous course," these lines

[sidenote: vide 3d page of this epistle.]
   { with better hopes, i trust, from avon's vales
   { this other "minstrel" cometh youth endear'd
no { god & good angels guide thee on thy road,
   { and gentler fortunes wait the friends i love.

[_lamb has crossed through the above lines_.]

let us prose.

what can i do till you send word what priced and placed house you should
like? islington (possibly) you would not like, to me 'tis classical
ground. knightsbridge is a desirable situation for the air of the parks.
st. george's fields is convenient for its contiguity to the bench.
chuse! but are you really coming to town? the hope of it has entirely
disarmed my petty disappointment of its nettles. yet i rejoice so much
on my own account, that i fear i do not feel enough pure satisfaction on
yours. why, surely, the joint editorship of the chron: must be a very
comfortable & secure living for a man. but should not you read french,
or do you? & can you write with sufficient moderation, as 'tis called,
when one suppresses the one half of what one feels, or could say, on a
subject, to chime in the better with popular luke-warmness?--white's
"letters" are near publication. could you review 'em, or get 'em
reviewed? are you not connected with the crit: rev:? his frontispiece is
a good conceit: sir john learning to dance, to please madame page, in
dress of doublet, etc., from [for] the upper half; & modern pantaloons,
with shoes, etc., of the 18th century, from [for] the lower half--& the
whole work is full of goodly quips & rare fancies, "all deftly masqued
like hoar antiquity"--much superior to dr. kenrick's falstaff's wedding,
which you may have seen. allen sometimes laughs at superstition, &
religion, & the like. a living fell vacant lately in the gift of the
hospital. white informed him that he stood a fair chance for it. he
scrupled & scrupled about it, and at last (to use his own words)
"tampered" with _godwin_ to know whether the thing was honest or not.
_godwin_ said nay to it, & allen rejected the living! could the blindest
poor papish have bowed more servilely to his priest or casuist? why
sleep the watchman's answers to that _godwin_? i beg you will not delay
to alter, if you mean to keep, those last lines i sent you. do that, &
read these for your pains:--

to the poet cowper

cowper, i thank my god that thou art heal'd!
thine was the sorest malady of all;
and i am sad to think that it should light
upon the worthy head! but thou art heal'd,
and thou art yet, we trust, the destin'd man,
born to reanimate the lyre, whose chords
have slumber'd, and have idle lain so long,
to the immortal sounding of whose strings
did milton frame the stately-paced verse;
among whose wires with lighter finger playing,
our elder bard, spenser, a gentle name,
the lady muses' dearest darling child,
elicited the deftest tunes yet heard
in hall or bower, taking the delicate ear
of sydney, & his peerless maiden queen.

thou, then, take up the mighty epic strain,
cowper, of england's bards, the wisest & the best.

1796.

i have read your climax of praises in those 3 reviews. these mighty
spouters-out of panegyric waters have, 2 of 'em, scattered their spray
even upon me! & the waters are cooling & refreshing. prosaically, the
monthly reviewers have made indeed a large article of it, & done you
justice. the critical have, in their wisdom, selected not the very best
specimens, & notice not, except as one name on the muster-roll, the
"religious musings." i suspect master dyer to have been the writer of
that article, as the substance of it was the very remarks & the very
language he used to me one day. i fear you will not accord entirely with
my sentiments of cowper, as _exprest_ above, (perhaps scarcely just),
but the poor gentleman has just recovered from his lunacies, & that
begets pity, & pity love, and love admiration, & then it goes hard with
people but they lie! have you read the ballad called "leonora," in the
second number of the "monthly magazine"? if you have !!!!!!!!!!!!!!
there is another fine song, from the same author (berger), in the 3d
no., of scarce inferior merit; & (vastly below these) there are some
happy specimens of english hexameters, in an imitation of ossian, in the
5th no. for your dactyls i am sorry you are so sore about 'em--a very
sir fretful! in good troth, the dactyls are good dactyls, but their
measure is naught. be not yourself "half anger, half agony" if i
pronounce your darling lines not to be the best you ever wrote--you have
written much.

for the alterations in those lines, let 'em run thus:

i may not come a pilgrim, to the banks
of _avon, lucid stream_, to taste the wave     (inspiring wave) was too
which shakspere drank, our british helicon;      common place.
or with mine eye, &c., &c.
_to muse, in tears_, on that mysterious youth, &c.    (better than "drop
                                                        a tear")

then the last paragraph alter thus

                                              better refer to my own
complaint begone, begone unkind reproof,      "complaint" solely than
take up, my song, take up a merrier strain,   half to that and half to
for yet again, & lo! from avon's vales,       chatterton, as in your
another mistrel cometh! youth _endeared_,     copy, which creates a
god & good angels &c., as before              confusion--"ominous
                                              fears" &c.

have a care, good master poet, of the statute de contumelia. what do you
mean by calling madame mara harlot & naughty things? the goodness of the
verse would not save you in a court of justice. but are you really
coming to town?

coleridge, a gentleman called in london lately from bristol, inquired
whether there were any of the family of a mr. chambers living--this mr.
chambers he said had been the making of a friend's fortune who wished to
make some return for it. he went away without seeing her. now, a mrs.
reynolds, a very intimate friend of ours, whom you have seen at our
house, is the only daughter, & all that survives, of mr. chambers--& a
very little supply would be of service to her, for she married very
unfortunately, & has parted with her husband. pray find out this mr.
pember (for that was the gentleman's friend's name), he is an attorney,
& lives at bristol. find him out, & acquaint him with the circumstances
of the case, & offer to be the medium of supply to mrs. reynolds, if he
chuses to make her a present. she is in very distrest circumstances. mr.
pember, attorney, bristol--mr. chambers lived in the temple. mrs.
reynolds, his daughter, was my schoolmistress, & is in the room at this
present writing. this last circumstance induced me to write so soon
again--i have not further to add--our loves to sara.

thursday.
c. lamb.

[the passage at the beginning, before "let us prose," together with the
later passages in the same manner, refers to the poem in the preceding
letter, which in slightly different form is printed in editions of lamb
as "lines to sara and her samuel." to complete the sense of the letter
one should compare the text of the poem in vol. iv.

coleridge had just received a suggestion, through dr. beddoes of
bristol, that he should replace grey, the late co-editor (with james
perry) of the _morning chronicle_. it came to nothing; but coleridge had
told lamb and had asked him to look out a house in town for him.

dr. kenrick's "falstaff's wedding," 1760, was a continuation of
shakespeare's "henry iv."

we do not know what were the last lines that lamb had sent to coleridge.
the lines to cowper were printed in the _monthly magazine_ for december,
1796.

coleridge's _poems_ were reviewed in the monthly review, june, 1796,
with no mention of lamb. the _critical review_ for the same month said
of lamb's effusions: "these are very beautiful."

burger's "leonora," which was to have such an influence upon english
literature (it was the foundation of much of sir walter scott's poetry),
was translated from the german by william taylor of norwich in 1790 and
printed in the _monthly magazine_ in march, 1796. scott at once made a
rival version. the other fine song, in the april _monthly magazine_, was
"the lass of fair wone."

the mention of the statute de contumelia seems to refer to the "lines
composed in a concert-room," which were first printed in the _morning
post_, september 24, 1799, but must have been written earlier. madame
mara (1749-1833) is not mentioned by name in the poem, but being one of
the principal singers of the day lamb probably fastened the epithet upon
her by way of pleasantry; or she may have been referred to in the
version of the lines which lamb had seen.

the passage about mr. chambers is not now explicable; but we know that
mrs. reynolds was lamb's schoolmistress, probably when he was very
small, and before he went to william bird's academy, and that in later
life he allowed her a pension of l30 a year until her death.

between this and the next letter came, in all probability, a number of
letters to coleridge which have been lost. it is incredible that lamb
kept silence, at this period, for eleven weeks.]




letter 8


charles lamb to s.t. coleridge

[p.m. september 27, 1796.]

my dearest friend--white or some of my friends or the public papers by
this time may have informed you of the terrible calamities that have
fallen on our family. i will only give you the outlines. my poor dear
dearest sister in a fit of insanity has been the death of her own
mother. i was at hand only time enough to snatch the knife out of her
grasp. she is at present in a mad house, from whence i fear she must be
moved to an hospital. god has preserved to me my senses,--i eat and
drink and sleep, and have my judgment i believe very sound. my poor
father was slightly wounded, and i am left to take care of him and my
aunt. mr. norris of the bluecoat school has been very very kind to us,
and we have no other friend, but thank god i am very calm and composed,
and able to do the best that remains to do. write,--as religious a
letter as possible--but no mention of what is gone and done with.--with
me "the former things are passed away," and i have something more to do
that [than] to feel--

god almighty have us all in his keeping.--

c. lamb.

mention nothing of poetry. i have destroyed every vestige of past
vanities of that kind. do as you please, but if you publish, publish
mine (i give free leave) without name or initial, and never send me a
book, i charge you.

you [your] own judgment will convince you not to take any notice of this
yet to your dear wife.--you look after your family,--i have my reason
and strength left to take care of mine. i charge you, don't think of
coming to see me. write. i will not see you if you come. god almighty
love you and all of us--

[the following is the report of the inquest upon mrs. lamb which
appeared in the _morning chronicle_ for september 26, 1796. the tragedy
had occurred on thursday, september 22:--

on friday afternoon the coroner and a respectable jury sat on the body
of a lady in the neighbourhood of holborn, who died in consequence of a
wound from her daughter the preceding day. it appeared by the evidence
adduced, that while the family were preparing for dinner, the young lady
seized a case knife laying on the table, and in a menacing manner
pursued a little girl, her apprentice, round the room; on the eager
calls of her helpless infirm mother to forbear, she renounced her first
object, and with loud shrieks approached her parent.

the child by her cries quickly brought up the landlord of the house, but
too late--the dreadful scene presented to him the mother lifeless,
pierced to the heart, on a chair, her daughter yet wildly standing over
her with the fatal knife, and the venerable old man, her father, weeping
by her side, himself bleeding at the forehead from the effects of a
severe blow he received from one of the forks she had been madly hurling
about the room.

for a few days prior to this the family had observed some symptoms of
insanity in her, which had so much increased on the wednesday evening,
that her brother early the next morning went in quest of dr.
pitcairn--had that gentleman been met with, the fatal catastrophe had,
in all probability, been prevented.

it seems the young lady had been once before, in her earlier years,
deranged, from the harassing fatigues of too much business.--as her
carriage towards her mother was ever affectionate in the extreme, it is
believed that to the increased attentiveness, which her parents'
infirmities called for by day and night, is to be attributed the present
insanity of this ill-fated young woman.

it has been stated in some of the morning papers, that she has an insane
brother also in confinement--this is without foundation.

the jury of course brought in their verdict, _lunacy_.

in the _whitehall evening post_ the first part of the account is the
same, but the end is as follows:--

the above unfortunate young person is a miss lamb, a mantua-maker, in
little queen-street, lincoln's-inn-fields. she has been, since, removed
to islington mad-house.

mr. norris of the blue-coat school has been confounded with randal
norris of the inner temple, another friend of the lambs, but is not, i
think, the same.

the reference to the poetry and coleridge's publication of it shows that
lamb had already been invited to contribute to the second edition of
coleridge's _poems_. the words "and never" in the original have a line
through them which might mean erasure, but, i think, does not.

"your own judgment..." mrs. coleridge had just become a mother: david
hartley coleridge was born on september 19.

this was coleridge's reply to lamb's letter, as given in gillman's _life
of coleridge_:--

"[september 28, 1796.]

"your letter, my friend, struck me with a mighty horror. it rushed upon
me and stupified my feelings. you bid me write you a religious letter; i
am not a man who would attempt to insult the greatness of your anguish
by any other consolation. heaven knows that in the easiest fortunes
there is much dissatisfaction and weariness of spirit; much that calls
for the exercise of patience and resignation; but in storms, like these,
that shake the dwelling and make the heart tremble, there is no middle
way between despair and the yielding up of the whole spirit unto the
guidance of faith. and surely it is a matter of joy, that your faith in
jesus has been preserved; the comforter that should relieve you is not
far from you. but as you are a christian, in the name of that saviour,
who was filled with bitterness and made drunken with wormwood, i conjure
you to have recourse in frequent prayer to 'his god and your god,' the
god of mercies, and father of all comfort. your poor father is, i hope,
almost senseless of the calamity; the unconscious instrument of divine
providence knows it not, and your mother is in heaven. it is sweet to be
roused from a frightful dream by the song of birds, and the gladsome
rays of the morning. ah, how infinitely more sweet to be awakened from
the blackness and amazement of a sudden horror, by the glories of god
manifest, and the hallelujahs of angels.

"as to what regards yourself, i approve altogether of your abandoning
what you justly call vanities. i look upon you as a man, called by
sorrow and anguish and a strange desolation of hopes into quietness, and
a soul set apart and made peculiar to god; we cannot arrive at any
portion of heavenly bliss without in some measure imitating christ. and
they arrive at the largest inheritance who imitate the most difficult
parts of his character, and bowed down and crushed under foot, cry in
fulness of faith, 'father, thy will be done.'

"i wish above measure to have you for a little while here--no visitants
shall blow on the nakedness of your feelings--you shall be quiet, and
your spirit may be healed. i see no possible objection, unless your
father's helplessness prevent you, and unless you are necessary to him.
if this be not the case, i charge you write me that you will come.

"i charge you, my dearest friend, not to dare to encourage gloom or
despair--you are a temporary sharer in human miseries, that you may be
an eternal partaker of the divine nature. i charge you, if by any means
it be possible, come to me.

"i remain, your affectionate,
"s.t. coleridge."]




letter 9


charles lamb to s.t. coleridge

[p.m. october 3, 1796.]

my dearest friend, your letter was an inestimable treasure to me. it
will be a comfort to you, i know, to know that our prospects are
somewhat brighter. my poor dear dearest sister, the unhappy and
unconscious instrument of the almighty's judgments to our house, is
restored to her senses; to a dreadful sense and recollection of what has
past, awful to her mind, and impressive (as it must be to the end of
life) but temper'd with religious resignation, and the reasonings of a
sound judgment, which in this early stage knows how to distinguish
between a deed committed in a transient fit of frenzy, and the terrible
guilt of a mother's murther. i have seen her. i found her this morning
calm and serene, far very very far from an indecent forgetful serenity;
she has a most affectionate and tender concern for what has happend.
indeed from the beginning, frightful and hopeless as her disorder
seemed, i had confidence enough in her strength of mind, and religious
principle, to look forward to a time when _even she_ might recover
tranquillity. god be praised, coleridge, wonderful as it is to tell, i
have never once been otherwise than collected, and calm; even on the
dreadful day and in the midst of the terrible scene i preserved a
tranquillity, which bystanders may have construed into indifference, a
tranquillity not of despair; is it folly or sin in me to say that it was
a religious principle that _most_ supported me? i allow much to other
favorable circumstances. i felt that i had something else to do than to
regret; on that first evening my aunt was lying insensible, to all
appearance like one dying,--my father, with his poor forehead plastered
over from a wound he had received from a daughter dearly loved by him,
and who loved him no less dearly,--my mother a dead and murder'd corpse
in the next room--yet was i wonderfully supported. i closed not my eyes
in sleep that night, but lay without terrors and without despair. i have
lost no sleep since. i had been long used not to rest in things of
sense, had endeavord after a comprehension of mind, unsatisfied with the
"ignorant present time," and this kept me up. i had the whole weight of
the family thrown on me, for my brother, little disposed (i speak not
without tenderness for him) at any time to take care of old age and
infirmities, had now, with his bad leg, an exemption from such duties,
and i was now left alone. one little incident may serve to make you
understand my way of managing my mind. within a day or 2 after the fatal
one, we drest for dinner a tongue, which we had had salted for some
weeks in the house. as i sat down a feeling like remorse struck
me,--this tongue poor mary got for me, and can i partake of it now, when
she is far away--a thought occurrd and relieved me,--if i give in to
this way of feeling, there is not a chair, a room, an object in our
rooms, that will not awaken the keenest griefs, i must rise above such
weaknesses.--i hope this was not want of true feeling. i did not let
this carry me, tho', too far. on the very 2d day (i date from the day of
horrors) as is usual in such cases there were a matter of 20 people i do
think supping in our room. they prevailed on me to eat _with them_, (for
to eat i never refused). they were all making merry! in the room,--some
had come from friendship, some from busy curiosity, and some from
interest; i was going to partake with them, when my recollection came
that my poor dead mother was lying in the next room, the very next room,
a mother who thro' life wished nothing but her children's welfare--
indignation, the rage of grief, something like remorse, rushed upon my
mind in an agony of emotion,--i found my way mechanically to the
adjoining room, and fell on my knees by the side of her coffin, asking
forgiveness of heaven, and sometimes of her, for forgetting her so soon.
tranquillity returned, and it was the only violent emotion that mastered
me, and i think it did me good.

i mention these things because i hate concealment, and love to give a
faithful journal of what passes within me. our friends have been very
good. sam le grice who was then in town was with me the first 3 or 4
first days, and was as a brother to me, gave up every hour of his time,
to the very hurting of his health and spirits, in constant attendance
and humouring my poor father. talk'd with him, read to him, play'd at
cribbage with him (for so short is the old man's recollection, that he
was playing at cards, as tho' nothing had happened, while the coroner's
inquest was sitting over the way!). samuel wept tenderly when he went
away, for his mother wrote him a very severe letter on his loitering so
long in town, and he was forced to go. mr. norris of christ hospital has
been as a father to me, mrs. norris as a mother; tho' we had few claims
on them. a gentleman, brother to my godmother, from whom we never had
right or reason to expect any such assistance, sent my father twenty
pounds,--and to crown all these god's blessings to our family at such a
time, an old lady, a cousin of my father and aunt's, a gentlewoman of
fortune, is to take my aunt and make her comfortable for the short
remainder of her days.

my aunt is recover'd and as well as ever, and highly pleased at thoughts
of going,--and has generously given up the interest of her little money
(which was formerly paid my father for her board) wholely and solely to
my sister's use. reckoning this we have, daddy and i, for our two selves
and an old maid servant to look after him, when i am out, which will be
necessary, l170 or l180 (rather) a year, out of which we can spare 50 or
60 at least for mary, while she stays at islington, where she must and
shall stay during her father's life for his and her comfort. i know john
will make speeches about it, but she shall not go into an hospital. the
good lady of the mad house, and her daughter, an elegant sweet behaved
young lady, love her and are taken with her amazingly, and i know from
her own mouth she loves them, and longs to be with them as much.--poor
thing, they say she was but the other morning saying, she knew she must
go to bethlem for life; that one of her brothers would have it so, but
the other would wish it not, but be obliged to go with the stream; that
she had often as she passed bedlam thought it likely "here it may be my
fate to end my days--" conscious of a certain flightiness in her poor
head oftentimes, and mindful of more than one severe illness of that
nature before. a legacy of l100, which my father will have at xmas, and
this 20 i mentioned before, with what is in the house will much more
than set us clear;--if my father, an old servant maid, and i, can't live
and live comfortably on l130 or l120 a year we ought to burn by slow
fires, and i almost would, that mary might not go into an hospital. let
me not leave one unfavourable impression on your mind respecting my
brother. since this has happened he has been very kind and brotherly;
but i fear for his mind,--he has taken his ease in the world, and is not
fit himself to struggle with difficulties, nor has much accustomed
himself to throw himself into their way,--and i know his language is
already, "charles, you must take care of yourself, you must not abridge
yourself of a single pleasure you have been used to," &c &c and in that
style of talking. but you, a necessarian, can respect a difference of
mind, and love what is _amiable_ in a character not perfect. he has been
very good, but i fear for his mind. thank god, i can unconnect myself
with him, and shall manage all my father's monies in future myself, if i
take charge of daddy, which poor john has not even hinted a wish, at any
future time even, to share with me. the lady at this mad house assures
me that i may dismiss immediately both doctor and apothecary, retaining
occasionally an opening draught or so for a while, and there is a less
expensive establishment in her house, where she will only not have a
room and nurse to herself for l50 or guineas a year--the outside would
be 60--you know by oeconomy how much more, even, i shall be able to
spare for her comforts.

she will, i fancy, if she stays, make one of the family, rather than of
the patients, and the old and young ladies i like exceedingly, and she
loves dearly, and they, as the saying is, take to her very
extraordinarily, if it is extraordinary that people who see my sister
should love her. of all the people i ever saw in the world my poor
sister was most and thoroughly devoid of the least tincture of
selfishness--i will enlarge upon her qualities, poor dear dearest soul,
in a future letter for my own comfort, for i understand her throughly;
and if i mistake not, in the most trying situation that a human being
can be found in, she will be found (i speak not with sufficient
humility, i fear, but humanly and foolishly speaking) she will be found,
i trust, uniformly great and amiable; god keep her in her present mind,
to whom be thanks and praise for all his dispensations to mankind.

lamb.

coleridge, continue to write; but do not for ever offend me by talking
of sending me cash. sincerely, and on my soul, we do not want it. god
love you both!

i will write again very soon. do you write directly.

these mentioned good fortunes and change of prospects had almost brought
my mind over to the extreme the very opposite to despair; i was in
danger of making myself too happy; your letter brought me back to a view
of things which i had entertained from the beginning; i hope (for mary i
can answer) but i hope that _i_ shall thro' life never have less
recollection nor a fainter impression of what has happened than i have
now; 'tis not a light thing, nor meant by the almighty to be received
lightly. i must be serious, circumspect, and deeply religious thro'
life; by such means may _both_ of us escape madness in future, if it so
please the almighty.

send me word, how it fares with sara. i repeat it, your letter was and
will be an inestimable treasure to me; you have a view of what my
situation demands of me like my own view; and i trust a just one.

[a word perhaps on lamb's salary might be fitting here. for the first
three years, from joining the east india house on april 5, 1792, he
received nothing. this probationary period over, he was given l40 for
the year 1795-1796. this, however, was raised to l70 in 1796 and there
were means of adding to it a little, by extra work and by a small
holiday grant. in 1797 it was l80, in 1799 l90, and from that time until
1814 it rose by l10 every second year.

samuel le grice was the younger brother of valentine le grice. both were
at christ's hospital with lamb and coleridge and are mentioned in the
_elia_ essay on the school. sam le grice afterwards had a commission in
the 60th foot, and died in jamaica in 1802, as we shall see.]




letter 10


charles lamb to s.t. coleridge

[p.m. october 17, 1796.]

my dearest friend, i grieve from my very soul to observe you in your
plans of life veering about from this hope to the other, and settling no
where. is it an untoward fatality (speaking humanly) that does this for
you, a stubborn irresistible concurrence of events? or lies the fault,
as i fear it does, in your own mind? you seem to be taking up splendid
schemes of fortune only to lay them down again, and your fortunes are an
ignis fatuus that has been conducting you, in thought, from lancaster
court, strand, to somewhere near matlock, then jumping across to dr.
somebody's whose son's tutor you were likely to be, and would to god the
dancing demon _may_ conduct you at last in peace and comfort to the
"life and labors of a cottager." you see from the above awkward
playfulness of fancy, that my spirits are not quite depressed; i should
ill deserve god's blessings, which since the late terrible event have
come down in mercy upon us, if i indulged regret or querulousness,--mary
continues serene and chearful,--i have not by me a little letter she
wrote to me, for, tho' i see her almost every day yet we delight to
write to one another (for we can scarce see each other but in company
with some of the people of the house), i have not the letter by me but
will quote from memory what she wrote in it. "i have no bad terrifying
dreams. at midnight when i happen to awake, the nurse sleeping by the
side of me, with the noise of the poor mad people around me, i have no
fear. the spirit of my mother seems to descend, and smile upon me, and
bid me live to enjoy the life and reason which the almighty has given
me--i shall see her again in heaven; she will then understand me better;
my grandmother too will understand me better, and will then say no more,
as she used to do, 'polly, what are those poor crazy moyther'd brains of
yours thinking of always?'"--poor mary, my mother indeed _never
understood_ her right. she loved her, as she loved us all, with a
mother's love; but in opinion, in feeling, and sentiment, and
disposition, bore so distant a resemblance to her daughter, that she
never understood her right. never could believe how much _she_ loved
her--but met her caresses, her protestations of filial affection, too
frequently with coldness and repulse.--still she was a good mother, god
forbid i should think of her but _most_ respectfully, _most_
affectionately. yet she would always love my brother above mary, who was
not worthy of one tenth of that affection, which mary had a right to
claim. but it is my sister's gratifying recollection, that every act of
duty and of love she could pay, every kindness (and i speak true, when i
say to the hurting of her health, and, most probably, in great part to
the derangement of her senses) thro' a long course of infirmities and
sickness, she could shew her, she ever did. i will some day, as i
promised, enlarge to you upon my sister's excellencies; 'twill seem like
exaggeration; but i will do it. at present short letters suit my state
of mind best. so take my kindest wishes for your comfort and
establishment in life, and for sara's welfare and comforts with you. god
love you; god love us all--

c. lamb.

[this letter is the only one in which lamb speaks freely of his mother.
he dwells on her memory in _blank verse_, 1798, but in later years he
mentioned her in his writings only twice, in the _elia_ essays "new
year's eve" and "my first play," and then very indirectly: probably from
the wish to spare his sister pain, although talfourd tells us that mary
lamb spoke of her mother often. compare the poem on page 110.

in a letter written by mary lamb to sarah stoddart on september 21,
1803, there is further light on mrs. lamb's want of sympathetic
understanding of certain characters.

the references at the beginning are to coleridge's idea of joining perry
on the _morning chronicle_; of teaching mrs. evans' children; of
establishing a school at derby, on the suggestion of dr. crompton; and
finally of moving from bristol to settle down in a cottage at nether
stowey, and support himself by husbandry and literature.]




letter 11


charles lamb to s.t. coleridge

oct. 24th, 1796. [monday.]

coleridge, i feel myself much your debtor for that spirit of confidence
and friendship which dictated your last letter. may your soul find peace
at last in your cottage life! i only wish you were but settled. do
continue to write to me. i read your letters with my sister, and they
give us both abundance of delight. especially they please us two, when
you talk in a religious strain,--not but we are offended occasionally
with a certain freedom of expression, a certain air of mysticism, more
consonant to the conceits of pagan philosophy, than consistent with the
humility of genuine piety. to instance now in your last letter--you say,
"it is by the press [sic], that god hath given finite spirits both evil
and good (i suppose you mean simply bad men and good men), a portion as
it were of his omnipresence!" now, high as the human intellect
comparatively will soar, and wide as its influence, malign or salutary,
can extend, is there not, coleridge, a distance between the divine mind
and it, which makes such language blasphemy? again, in your first fine
consolatory epistle you say, "you are a temporary sharer in human
misery, that you may be an eternal partaker of the divine nature." what
more than this do those men say, who are for exalting the man christ
jesus into the second person of an unknown trinity,--men, whom you or i
scruple not to call idolaters? man, full of imperfections, at best, and
subject to wants which momentarily remind him of dependence; man, a weak
and ignorant being, "servile" from his birth "to all the skiey
influences," with eyes sometimes open to discern the right path, but a
head generally too dizzy to pursue it; man, in the pride of speculation,
forgetting his nature, and hailing in himself the future god, must make
the angels laugh. be not angry with me, coleridge; i wish not to cavil;
i know i cannot _instruct_ you; i only wish to _remind_ you of that
humility which best becometh the christian character. god, in the new
testament (_our best guide_), is represented to us in the kind,
condescending, amiable, familiar light of a _parent_: and in my poor
mind 'tis best for us so to consider of him, as our heavenly father, and
our _best friend_, without indulging too bold conceptions of his nature.
let us learn to think humbly of ourselves, and rejoice in the
appellation of "dear children," "brethren," and "co-heirs with christ of
the promises," seeking to know no further.

i am not insensible, indeed i am not, of the value of that first letter
of yours, and i shall find reason to thank you for it again and again
long after that blemish in it is forgotten. it will be a fine lesson of
comfort to us, whenever we read it; and read it we often shall, mary and
i.

accept our loves and best kind wishes for the welfare of yourself and
wife, and little one. nor let me forget to wish you joy on your birthday
so lately past; i thought you had been older. my kind thanks and
remembrances to lloyd. god love us all, and may he continue to be the
father and the friend of the whole human race!

sunday evening. c. lamb.

[it is interesting to notice that with these letters lamb suddenly
assumes a gravity, independence and sense of authority that hitherto his
correspondence has lacked. the responsibility of the household seems to
have awakened his extraordinary common sense and fine understanding
sense of justice. previously he had ventured to criticise only
coleridge's literary exercises; he places his finger now on conduct too.

coleridge's "last letter" has not been preserved; but the "first fine
consolatory epistle" is printed above.

this letter contains the first mention of charles lloyd (1775-1839), who
was afterwards to be for a while so intimately associated with lamb.
charles lloyd was the son of a quaker banker of birmingham. he had
published a volume of poems the year before and had met coleridge when
that magnetic visionary had visited birmingham to solicit subscribers
for _the watchman_ early in 1796. the proposition that lloyd should live
with coleridge and become in a way his pupil was agreed to by his
parents, and in september he accompanied the philosopher to nether
stowey a day or so after david hartley's birth, all eager to begin
domestication and tutelage. lloyd was a sensitive, delicate youth, with
an acute power of analysis and considerable grasp of metaphysical ideas.
no connection ever began more amiably. he was, i might add, by only two
days lamb's junior.]




letter 12


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge
oct. 28th, 1796.

my dear friend, i am not ignorant that to be a partaker of the divine
nature is a phrase to be met with in scripture: i am only apprehensive,
lest we in these latter days, tinctured (some of us perhaps pretty
deeply) with mystical notions and the pride of metaphysics, might be apt
to affix to such phrases a meaning, which the primitive users of them,
the simple fishermen of galilee for instance, never intended to convey.
with that other part of your apology i am not quite so well satisfied.
you seem to me to have been straining your comparing faculties to bring
together things infinitely distant and unlike; the feeble narrow-sphered
operations of the human intellect and the everywhere diffused mind of
deity, the peerless wisdom of jehovah. even the expression appears to me
inaccurate--portion of omnipresence--omnipresence is an attribute whose
very essence is unlimitedness. how can omnipresence be affirmed of
anything in part? but enough of this spirit of disputatiousness. let us
attend to the proper business of human life, and talk a little together
respecting our domestic concerns. do you continue to make me acquainted
with what you were doing, and how soon you are likely to be settled once
for all.

i have satisfaction in being able to bid you rejoice with me in my
sister's continued reason and composedness of mind. let us both be
thankful for it. i continue to visit her very frequently, and the people
of the house are vastly indulgent to her; she is likely to be as
comfortably situated in all respects as those who pay twice or thrice
the sum. they love her, and she loves them, and makes herself very
useful to them. benevolence sets out on her journey with a good heart,
and puts a good face on it, but is apt to limp and grow feeble, unless
she calls in the aid of self-interest by way of crutch. in mary's case,
as far as respects those she is with, 'tis well that these principles
are so likely to co-operate. i am rather at a loss sometimes for books
for her,--our reading is somewhat confined, and we have nearly exhausted
our london library. she has her hands too full of work to read much, but
a little she must read; for reading was her daily bread. have you seen
bowles's new poem on "hope?" what character does it bear? has he
exhausted his stores of tender plaintiveness? or is he the same in this
last as in all his former pieces? the duties of the day call me off from
this pleasant intercourse with my friend--so for the present adieu.

now for the truant borrowing of a few minutes from business. have you
met with a new poem called the "pursuits of literature?" from the
extracts in the "british review" i judge it to be a very humorous thing;
in particular i remember what i thought a very happy character of dr.
darwin's poetry. among all your quaint readings did you ever light upon
walton's "complete angler"? i asked you the question once before; it
breathes the very spirit of innocence, purity, and simplicity of heart;
there are many choice old verses interspersed in it; it would sweeten a
man's temper at any time to read it; it would christianise every
discordant angry passion; pray make yourself acquainted with it. have
you made it up with southey yet? surely one of you two must have been a
very silly fellow, and the other not much better, to fall out like
boarding-school misses; kiss, shake hands, and make it up?

when will he be delivered of his new epic? _madoc_ i think, is to be the
name of it; though that is a name not familiar to my ears. what progress
do you make in your hymns? what review are you connected with? if with
any, why do you delay to notice white's book? you are justly offended at
its profaneness; but surely you have undervalued its _wit_, or you would
have been more loud in its praises. do not you think that in _slender's_
death and madness there is most exquisite humour, mingled with
tenderness, that is irresistible, truly shakspearian? be more full in
your mention of it. poor fellow, he has (very undeservedly) lost by it;
nor do i see that it is likely ever to reimburse him the charge of
printing, etc. give it a lift, if you can. i suppose you know that
allen's wife is dead, and he, just situated as he was, never the better,
as the worldly people say, for her death, her money with her children
being taken off his hands. i am just now wondering whether you will ever
come to town again, coleridge; 'tis among the things i dare not hope,
but can't help wishing. for myself, i can live in the midst of town
luxury and superfluity, and not long for them, and i can't see why your
children might not hereafter do the same. remember, you are not in
arcadia when you are in the west of england, and they may catch
infection from the world without visiting the metropolis. but you seem
to have set your heart upon this same cottage plan; and god prosper you
in the experiment! i am at a loss for more to write about; so 'tis as
well that i am arrived at the bottom of my paper.

god love you, coleridge!--our best loves and tenderest wishes await on
you, your sara, and your little one.

c. l.

[bowles's poem was "hope, an allegorical sketch on slowly recovering
from sickness." see note on pages 78 and 79.

_the pursuits of literature_, was a literary satire in the form of
dialogues in verse, garnished with very outspoken notes, by thomas james
mathias (1754?-1835), which appeared between 1794 and 1797.

southey had returned from portugal in the summer, when the quarrel
between coleridge and himself revived; but about the time of hartley's
birth some kind of a reconciliation was patched up. _madoc_, as it
happened, was not published until 1805, although in its first form it
was completed in 1797.

writing to charles lloyd, sen., in december, 1796, coleridge says that
he gives his evenings to his engagements with the _critical review_ and
_new monthly magazine_.

this is the passage in falstaff's letters describing blender's death:--

davy to shallow

master abram is dead, gone, your worship--dead! master abram! oh! good
your worship, a's gone.--a' never throve, since a' came from windsor--
'twas his death. i call'd him a rebel, your worship--but a' was all
subject--a' was subject to any babe, as much as a king--a' turn'd, like
as it were the latter end of a lover's lute--a' was all peace and
resignment--a' took delight in nothing but his book of songs and
sonnets--a' would go to the stroud side under the large beech tree, and
sing, till 'twas quite pity of our lives to mark him; for his chin grew
as long as a muscle--oh! a' sung his soul and body quite away--a' was
lank as any greyhound, and had such a scent! i hid his love-songs among
your worship's law-books; for i thought if a' could not get at them, it
might be to his quiet; but a' snuff'd 'em out in a moment.--good your
worship, have the wise woman of brentfort secured--master abram may have
been conjured--peter simple says, a' never look'd up, after a' sent to
the wise woman--marry, a' was always given to look down afore his
elders; a' might do it, a' was given to it--your worship knows it; but
then 'twas peak and pert with him--a' was a man again, marry, in the
turn of his heel.--a' died, your worship, just about one, at the crow of
the cock.--i thought how it was with him; for a' talk'd as quick, aye,
marry, as glib as your worship; and a' smiled, and look'd at his own
nose, and call'd "sweet ann page." i ask'd him if a' would eat--so a'
bad us commend him to his cousin robert (a' never call'd your worship so
before) and bade us get hot meat, for a' would not say nay to ann
again.[*]--but a' never liv'd to touch it--a' began all in a moment to
sing "lovers all, a madrigal." 'twas the only song master abram ever
learnt out of book, and clean by heart, your worship--and so a' sung,
and smiled, and look'd askew at his own nose, and sung, and sung on,
till his breath waxed shorter, and shorter, and shorter, and a' fell
into a struggle and died. i beseech your worship to think he was well
tended--i look'd to him, your worship, late and soon, and crept at his
heel all day long, an it had been any fallow dog--but i thought a' could
never live, for a' did so sing, and then a' never drank with it--i knew
'twas a bad sign--yea, a' sung, your worship, marry, without drinking a
drop.

[footnote: vide "merry wives of windsor." latter part of the 1st scene,
1st act.]]




letter 13


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge
nov. 8th, 1796.

my brother, my friend,--i am distrest for you, believe me i am; not so
much for your painful, troublesome complaint, which, i trust, is only
for a time, as for those anxieties which brought it on, and perhaps even
now may be nursing its malignity. tell me, dearest of my friends, is
your mind at peace, or has anything, yet unknown to me, happened to give
you fresh disquiet, and steal from you all the pleasant dreams of future
rest? are you still (i fear you are) far from being comfortably settled?
would to god it were in my power to contribute towards the bringing of
you into the haven where you would be! but you are too well skilled in
the philosophy of consolation to need my humble tribute of advice; in
pain and in sickness, and in all manner of disappointments, i trust you
have that within you which shall speak peace to your mind. make it, i
entreat you, one of your puny comforts, that i feel for you, and share
all your griefs with you. i feel as if i were troubling you about
_little_ things; now i am going to resume the subject of our last two
letters, but it may divert us both from unpleasanter feelings to make
such matters, in a manner, of importance. without further apology, then,
it was not that i did not relish, that i did not in my heart thank you
for, those little pictures of your feelings which you lately sent me, if
i neglected to mention them. you may remember you had said much the same
things before to me on the same subject in a former letter, and i
considered those last verses as only the identical thoughts better
clothed; either way (in prose or verse) such poetry must be welcome to
me. i love them as i love the confessions of rousseau, and for the same
reason: the same frankness, the same openness of heart, the same
disclosure of all the most hidden and delicate affections of the mind:
they make me proud to be thus esteemed worthy of the place of
friend-confessor, brother-confessor, to a man like coleridge. this last
is, i acknowledge, language too high for friendship; but it is also, i
declare, too sincere for flattery. now, to put on stilts, and talk
magnificently about trifles--i condescend, then, to your counsel,
coleridge, and allow my first sonnet (sick to death am i to make mention
of my sonnets, and i blush to be so taken up with them, indeed i do)--i
allow it to run thus, "_fairy land_" &c. &c., as i [? you] last wrote
it.

the fragments i now send you i want printed to get rid of 'em; for,
while they stick burr-like to my memory, they tempt me to go on with the
idle trade of versifying, which i long--most sincerely i speak it--i
long to leave off, for it is unprofitable to my soul; i feel it is; and
these questions about words, and debates about alterations, take me off,
i am conscious, from the properer business of _my_ life. take my sonnets
once for all, and do not propose any re-amendments, or mention them
again in any shape to me, i charge you. i blush that my mind can
consider them as things of any worth. and pray admit or reject these
fragments, as you like or dislike them, without ceremony. call 'em
sketches, fragments, or what you will, but do not entitle any of my
_things_ love sonnets, as i told you to call 'em; 'twill only make me
look little in my own eyes; for it is a passion of which i retain
_nothing_; 'twas a weakness, concerning which i may say, in the words of
petrarch (whose life is now open before me), "if it drew me out of some
vices, it also prevented the growth of many virtues, filling me with the
love of the creature rather than the creator, which is the death of the
soul." thank god, the folly has left me for ever; not even a review of
my love verses renews one wayward wish in me; and if i am at all
solicitous to trim 'em out in their best apparel, it is because they are
to make their appearance in good company. now to my fragments. lest you
have lost my grandame, she shall be one. 'tis among the few verses i
ever wrote (that to mary is another) which profit me in the
recollection. god love her,--and may we two never love each other less!

these, coleridge, are the few sketches i have thought worth preserving;
how will they relish thus detached? will you reject all or any of them?
they are thine: do whatsoever thou listest with them. my eyes ache with
writing long and late, and i wax wondrous sleepy; god bless you and
yours, me and mine! good night.

                                c. lamb.

i will keep my eyes open reluctantly a minute longer to tell you, that i
love you for those simple, tender, heart-flowing lines with which you
conclude your last, and in my eyes best, sonnet (so you call 'em),

"so, for the mother's sake, the child was dear,
and dearer was the mother for the child."

cultivate simplicity, coleridge, or rather, i should say, banish
elaborateness; for simplicity springs spontaneous from the heart, and
carries into daylight its own modest buds and genuine, sweet, and clear
flowers of expression. i allow no hot-beds in the gardens of parnassus.
i am unwilling to go to bed, and leave my sheet unfilled (a good piece
of night-work for an idle body like me), so will finish with begging you
to send me the earliest account of your complaint, its progress, or (as
i hope to god you will be able to send me) the tale of your recovery, or
at least amendment. my tenderest remembrances to your sara.--

once more good night.

[coleridge, on november 2, had begun to suffer from his lifelong enemy,
neuralgia, the result largely of worry concerning his future, so many of
his projects having broken down. he was subduing it with laudanum--the
beginning of that fatal habit.

we do not know what were the verses which coleridge had sent lamb,
possibly the three sonnets on the birth of hartley, the third of which
is referred to below.

lamb's decision in september to say or hear no more of his own poetry
here breaks down. the reference to the fairy land sonnet is only
partially explained by the parallel version which i printed on page 25;
for "fairy land" was coleridge's version. either lamb had made a new
version, substituting "fairy land" for "faery," or he wrote, "i allow it
to run thus: fairy land, &c., &c., as _you_ last wrote it." when
reprinted, however, it ran as lamb originally wished. the other
fragments were those afterwards included in coleridge's _poems_, second
edition, 1797.

"love sonnets." lamb changed his mind again on this subject, and yet
again.

coleridge's last of the three sonnets on the birth of hartley was
entitled "sonnet to a friend [charles lloyd] who asked how i felt when
the nurse first presented my infant to me." it closed with the lines
which lamb copies.]




letter 14


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

nov. 14th, 1796.

coleridge, i love you for dedicating your poetry to bowles. genius of
the sacred fountain of tears, it was he who led you gently by the hand
through all this valley of weeping, showed you the dark green yew trees
and the willow shades where, by the fall of waters, you might indulge an
uncomplaining melancholy, a delicious regret for the past, or weave fine
visions of that awful future,

"when all the vanities of life's brief day
oblivion's hurrying hand hath swept away,
and all its sorrows, at the awful blast
of the archangel's trump, are but as shadows past."

i have another sort of dedication in my head for my few things, which i
want to know if you approve of, and can insert. i mean to inscribe them
to my sister. it will be unexpected, and it will give her pleasure; or
do you think it will look whimsical at all? as i have not spoke to her
about it, i can easily reject the idea. but there is a monotony in the
affections, which people living together or, as we do now, very
frequently seeing each other, are apt to give in to: a sort of
indifference in the expression of kindness for each other, which demands
that we should sometimes call to our aid the trickery of surprise. do
you publish with lloyd or without him? in either case my little portion
may come last, and after the fashion of orders to a country
correspondent i will give directions how i should like to have 'em done.
the title-page to stand thus:--

poems,

chiefly love sonnets
by

charles lamb, of the india house.

under this title the following motto, which, for want of room, i put
over leaf, and desire you to insert, whether you like it or no. may not
a gentleman choose what arms, mottoes, or armorial bearings the herald
will give him leave, without consulting his republican friend, who might
advise none? may not a publican put up the sign of the saracen's head,
even though his undiscerning neighbour should prefer, as more genteel,
the cat and gridiron?

(motto.)

"this beauty, in the blossom of my youth,
when my first fire knew no adulterate incense,
nor i no way to flatter but my fondness,
in the best language my true tongue could tell me,
and all the broken sighs my sick heart lend me,
i sued and served. long did i love this lady."

massinger.

the dedication.

       *       *       *       *       *

the few following poems,
creatures of the fancy and the feeling
in life's more vacant hours,
produced, for the most part, by
love in idleness,
are,
with all a brother's fondness,
inscribed to
mary ann lamb,
the author's best friend and sister.

       *       *       *       *       *

this is the pomp and paraphernalia of parting, with which i take my
leave of a passion which has reigned so royally (so long) within me;
thus, with its trappings of laureatship, i fling it off, pleased and
satisfied with myself that the weakness troubles me no longer. i am
wedded, coleridge, to the fortunes of my sister and my poor old father.
oh! my friend, i think sometimes, could i recall the days that are past,
which among them should i choose? not those "merrier days," not the
"pleasant days of hope," not "those wanderings with a fair hair'd maid,"
which i have so often and so feelingly regretted, but the days,
coleridge, of a _mother's_ fondness for her _school-boy_. what would i
give to call her back to earth for _one_ day, on my knees to ask her
pardon for all those little asperities of temper which, from time to
time, have given her gentle spirit pain; and the day, my friend, i trust
will come; there will be "time enough" for kind offices of love, if
"heaven's eternal year" be ours. hereafter, her meek spirit shall not
reproach me. oh, my friend, cultivate the filial feelings! and let no
man think himself released from the kind "charities" of relationship:
these shall give him peace at the last; these are the best foundation
for every species of benevolence. i rejoice to hear, by certain
channels, that you, my friend, are reconciled with all your relations.
'tis the most kindly and natural species of love, and we have all the
associated train of early feelings to secure its strength and
perpetuity. send me an account of your health; _indeed_ i am solicitous
about you. god love you and yours. c. lamb.

[it seems to have been coleridge's intention to dedicate the second
edition of his _poems_ to bowles; but he changed his mind and dedicated
it to his brother, the rev. george coleridge. a sonnet to bowles was
included in the volume, a kind of sub-dedication of the other sonnets,
but it had appeared also in the 1796 volume.

lamb's instructions concerning his share in the 1797 volume were carried
out, except that the sub-title was omitted.

the quotations "merrier days" ("happier days") and "wanderings with a
fair-hair'd maid" are from lamb's own sonnets; those in lines 9 and 10
from dryden's elegy on mrs. killigrew.

coleridge had paid in the summer a long-deferred visit of reconciliation
to his family at ottery st. mary.]




letter 15


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[p.m. december 2, 1796 (friday).]

i have delay'd writing thus long, not having by me my copy of your
poems, which i had lent. i am not satisfied with all your intended
omissions. why omit 40: 63: 84: above all, let me protest strongly
against your rejecting the "complaint of ninathoma," 86. the words, i
acknowledge, are ossian's, but you have added to them the "music of
caril." if a vicarious substitute be wanting, sacrifice (and 'twill be a
piece of self-denial _too_) the epitaph on an infant, of which its
author seems so proud, so tenacious. or, if your heart be set on
_perpetuating_ the four-line-wonder, i'll tell you what [to] do: sell
the copywright of it at once to a country statuary; commence in this
manner death's prime poet laureat; and let your verses be adopted in
every village round instead of those hitherto famous ones "afflictions
sore long time i bore, physicians were in vain". i have seen your last
very beautiful poem in the monthly magazine--write thus, and you most
generally have written thus, and i shall never quarrel with you about
simplicity. with regard to my lines "laugh all that weep," etc.--i would
willingly sacrifice them, but my portion of the volume is so
ridiculously little, that in honest truth i can't spare them. as things
are, i have very slight pretensions to participate in the
title-page.--white's book is at length reviewed in the monthly; was it
your doing, or dyer's to whom i sent him? or rather do you not write in
the critical? for i observed, in an article of this month's a line
quoted out of _that_ sonnet on mrs. siddons "with eager wond'ring and
perturb'd delight"--and a line from _that_ sonnet would not readily have
occurred to a stranger. that sonnet, coleridge, brings afresh to my mind
the time when you wrote those on bowles, priestly, burke--'twas 2
christmases ago, and in that nice little smoky room at the salutation,
which is even now continually presenting itself to my recollection, with
all its associated train of pipes, tobacco, egghot, welch rabbits,
metaphysics and poetry.

are we never to meet again? how differently i am circumstanced now--i
have never met with any one, never shall meet with any one, who could or
can compensate me for the loss of your society--i have no one to talk
all these matters about to--i lack friends, i lack books to supply their
absence. but these complaints ill become me: let me compare my present
situation, prospects, and state of mind, with what they were but 2
months back--_but_ 2 months. o my friend, i am in danger of forgetting
the awful lessons then presented to me--remind me of them; remind me of
my duty. talk seriously with me when you do write. i thank you, from my
heart i thank you, for your sollicitude about my sister. she is quite
well,--but must not, i fear, come to live with us yet a good while. in
the first place, because at present it would hurt her, and hurt my
father, for them to be together: secondly from a regard to the world's
good report, for i fear, i fear, tongues will be busy _whenever_ that
event takes place. some have hinted, one man has prest it on me, that
she should be in perpetual confinement--what she hath done to deserve,
or the necessity of such an hardship, i see not; do you? i am starving
at the india house, near 7 o'clock without my dinner, and so it has been
and will be almost all the week. i get home at night o'erwearied, quite
faint,--and then to cards with my father, who will not let me enjoy a
meal in peace--but i must conform to my situation, and i hope i am, for
the most part, not unthankful.

i am got home at last, and, after repeated games at cribbage have got my
father's leave to write awhile: with difficulty got it, for when i
expostulated about playing any more, he very aptly replied, "if you
won't play with me, you might as well not come home at all." the
argument was unanswerable, and i set to afresh.

i told you, i do not approve of your omissions. neither do i quite
coincide with you in your arrangements: i have not time to point out a
better, and i suppose some self-associations of your own have determined
their place as they now stand. your beginning indeed with the joan of
arc lines i coincide entirely with: i love a splendid outset, a
magnificent portico; and the diapason is grand--the religious musings--
when i read them, i think how poor, how unelevated, unoriginal, my blank
verse is, "laugh all that weep" especially, where the subject demanded a
grandeur of conception: and i ask what business they have among
yours--but friendship covereth a multitude of defects. why omit 73? at
all events, let me plead for those former pages,--40. 63. 84. 86. i
should like, for old acquaintance sake, to spare 62. 119 would have made
a figure among _shenstone_'s elegies: _you_ may admit it or reject, as
you please. in the man of ross let the old line stand as it used:
"wine-cheer'd moments" much better than the lame present one. 94, change
the harsh word "foodful" into "dulcet" or, if not too harsh,
"nourishing." 91, "moveless": is that as good as "moping"?--8, would it
not read better omitting those 2 lines last but 6 about inspiration? i
want some loppings made in the chatterton; it wants but a little to make
it rank among the finest irregular lyrics i ever read. have you time and
inclination to go to work upon it--or is it too late--or do you think it
needs none? don't reject those verses in one of your watchmen--"dear
native brook," &c.--nor, i think, those last lines you sent me, in which
"all effortless" is without doubt to be preferred to "inactive." if i am
writing more than ordinarily dully, 'tis that i am stupified with a
tooth-ache. 37, would not the concluding lines of the 1st paragraph be
well omitted--& it go on "so to sad sympathies" &c.? in 40, if you
retain it, "wove" the learned toil is better than "urge," which spoils
the personification. hang it, do not omit 48. 52. 53. what you do retain
tho', call sonnets for god's sake, and not effusions,--spite of your
ingenious anticipation of ridicule in your preface. the last 5 lines of
50 are too good to be lost, the rest is not much worth. my tooth becomes
importunate--i must finish. pray, pray, write to me: if you knew with
what an anxiety of joy i open such a long packet as you last sent me,
you would not grudge giving a few minutes now and then to this
intercourse (the only intercourse, i fear we two shall ever have), this
conversation, with your friend--such i boast to be called.

god love you and yours.

write to me when you move, lest i direct wrong.

has sara no poems to publish? those lines 129 are probably too light for
the volume where the religious musings are--but i remember some very
beautiful lines addrest by somebody at bristol to somebody at london.

god bless you once more.

c. lamb.

thursday night.

[this letter refers to the preparation of coleridge's second edition of
his _poems_. "why omit 40, 63, 84?"--these were "absence," "to the
autumnal moon" and the imitation from ossian.

the "epitaph on an infant" ran thus:--

ere sin could blight, or sorrow fade,
  death came with friendly care;
the opening bud to heaven conveyed
  and bade it blossom there.

lamb applied the first two lines to a sucking pig in his _elia_ essay on
"roast pig" many years later. the old epitaph runs:--

afflictions sore long time i bore,
physicians were in vain;
till heaven did please my woes to ease,
and take away my pain.

coleridge's very beautiful poem in the _monthly magazine_ (for october)
was "reflections on entering into active life," beginning, "low was our
pretty cot."

lamb's lines, "laugh all that weep," i cannot find. we learn later that
they were in blank verse.

_falstaff's letters_ was reviewed in the _monthly review_ for november,
1796, very favourably. the article was quite possibly by coleridge.

the sonnet on mrs. siddons was written by lamb and coleridge together
when coleridge was in london at the end of 1794, and it formed one of a
series of sonnets on eminent persons printed in the _morning chronicle_,
of which those on bowles, priestley and burke were others. the quotation
from it was in an article in the november _critical review_ on the
"musae etonenses."

"one man has prest it on me." there is reason to suppose that this was
john lamb, the brother.

as it happened coleridge did not begin his second edition with the "joan
of arc" lines, but with the "ode to the new year." the "religious
musings" brought coleridge's part of the volume to a close.

the poem on page 73 was "in the manner of spenser." the poems on pages
40, 63, 84, we know; that on page 86 was "the complaint of ninathoma."
"to genevieve" was on page 62. that on page 119 was "to a friend in
answer to a melancholy letter." coleridge never restored the phrase
"wine-cheer'd moments" to "the man of ross." he did not change "foodful"
to "dulcet" in "to an infant." he did not alter "moveless" to "moping"
in "the young ass." he left the inspiration passage as it was in the
"monody on chatterton." not that he disregarded all lamb's advice, as a
comparison of the 1796 and 1797 editions of the _poems_ will show.

the poem "dear native brook" was the sonnet "to the river otter."
coleridge took lamb's counsel. the poem containing the phrase "all
effortless" was that "addressed to a young man of fortune" (charles
lloyd). coleridge did not include it. the poem on page 37 was "to a
young lady with a poem on the french revolution." nos. 48, 52 and 53
were the sonnets to priestley, kosciusko and fayette. the last five
lines of 50 were in the sonnet to sheridan. the lines on page 129 were
sara's verses "the silver thimble." none of these were reprinted in
1797. the beautiful lines addressed from somebody at bristol to somebody
at london were those from sara coleridge to lamb, referred to on page
33. coleridge persisted in the use of the word "effusion".]




letter 16


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[dated at end: dec. 5, 1796.]

_to a young lady going out to india_

hard is the heart, that does not melt with ruth
when care sits cloudy on the brow of youth,
when bitter griefs the _female_ bosom swell
and beauty meditates a fond farewell
to her loved native land, and early home,
in search of peace thro' "stranger climes to roam."[*]

the muse, with glance prophetic, sees her stand,
forsaken, silent lady, on the strand
of farthest india, sickening at the war
of waves slow-beating, dull upon the shore
stretching, at gloomy intervals, her eye
o'er the wide waters vainly to espy
the long-expected bark, in which to find
some tidings of a world she has left behind.

in that sad hour shall start the gushing tear
for scenes her childhood loved, now doubly dear,
in that sad hour shall frantic memory awake
pangs of remorse for slighted england's sake,
and for the sake of many a tender tye
of love or friendship pass'd too lightly by.
unwept, unpitied, midst an alien race,
and the cold looks of many a stranger face,
how will her poor heart bleed, and chide the day,
that from her country took her far away.

[footnote: bowles. ["the african," line 27.]]

[_lamb has struck his pen through the foregoing poem._]

coleridge, the above has some few decent [lines in] it, and in the
paucity of my portion of your volume may as well be inserted; i would
also wish to retain the following if only to perpetuate the memory of so
exquisite a pleasure as i have often received at the performance of the
tragedy of douglas, when mrs. siddons has been the lady randolph. both
pieces may be inserted between the sonnets and the sketches--in which
latter, the last leaf but one of them, i beg you to alter the words
"pain and want" to "pain and grief," this last being a more familiar and
ear-satisfying combination. do it i beg of you. to understand the
following, if you are not acquainted with the play, you should know that
on the death of douglas his mother threw herself down a rock; and that
at that time scotland was busy in repelling the danes.

the tomb of douglas
_see the tragedy of that name_
when her son, her douglas died,
to the steep rock's fearful side
fast the frantic mother hied.

o'er her blooming warrior dead
many a tear did scotland shed,
and shrieks of long and loud lament
from her grampian hills she sent.

like one awakening from a trance,
she met the shock of lochlin's lance.           denmark
on her rude invader foe
return'd an hundred fold the blow.
drove the taunting spoiler home:
mournful thence she took her way
to do observance at the tomb,
where the son of douglas [lay],

round about the tomb did go
in solemn state and order slow,
silent pace, and black attire,
earl, or knight, or good esquire,
who e'er by deeds of valour done
in battle had high honors won;
whoe'er in their pure veins could trace
the blood of douglas' noble race.

with them the flower of minstrels came,
and to their cunning harps did frame
in doleful numbers piercing rhimes,
such strains as in the olden times
had soothed the spirit of fingal
echoing thro' his fathers' hall.

"scottish maidens, drop a tear
o'er the beauteous hero's bier.
brave youth and comely 'bove compare;
all golden shone his burnish'd hair;
valor and smiling courtesy
played in the sunbeams of his eye.
closed are those eyes that shone so fair
and stain'd with blood his yellow hair.
scottish maidens drop a tear
o'er the beauteous hero's bier."

"not a tear, i charge you, shed
for the false glenalvon dead;
unpitied let glenalvon lie,
foul stain to arms and chivalry."

"behind his back the traitor came,
and douglas died without his fame."

[_lamb has struck his pen through the lines against which i have put an
asterisk_.]

*"scottish maidens, drop a tear,
*o'er the beauteous hero's bier."
*"bending warrior, o'er thy grave,
young light of scotland early spent!
thy country thee shall long lament,
*_douglas 'beautiful and brave'!_
and oft to after times shall tell,
_in hopes sweet prime my hero fell_."

[_lamb has struck his pen through the remainder_.]

"thane or lordling, think no scorn
of the poor and lowly-born.
in brake obscure or lonely dell
the simple flowret prospers well;
the _gentler_ virtues cottage-bred,                omitted
thrive best beneath the humble shed.
low-born hinds, opprest, obscure,
ye who patiently endure
to bend the knee and bow the head,
and thankful eat _another's bread_
well may ye mourn your best friend dead,
till life with grief together end:
he would have been the poor man's friend."

"bending, warrior, o'er thy grave,
young light of scotland early spent!               omitted
thy country thee shall long lament,
douglas, '_beautiful and brave_'!
and oft to after times shall tell,                 omitted
_in life's young prime my hero fell_."

[sidenote: is "_morbid_ wantonness of woe" a good and allowable phrase?]

at length i have done with verse making. not that i relish other
people's poetry less,--theirs comes from 'em without effort, mine is the
difficult operation of a brain scanty of ideas, made more difficult by
disuse. i have been reading the "task" with fresh delight. i am glad you
love cowper. i could forgive a man for not enjoying milton, but i would
not call that man my friend, who should be offended with the "divine
chit-chat of cowper." write to me.--god love you and yours,

c. l.

[the name of the young lady going out to india is not known; the verses
were printed in the _monthly magazine_ for march, 1797, but not in
coleridge's _poems_, 1797. "the tomb of douglas" was included in that
volume. the poem in which the alteration "pain and want" was to be made
(but was not made, or was made and cancelled later) was "fancy employed
on divine subjects."

the "divine chit-chat of cowper" was coleridge's own phrase. it is a
pretty circumstance that lamb and cowper now share (with keats) a
memorial in edmonton church.]

       *       *       *       *       *




letter 17


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[little queen street, night of dec. 9th,] 1796.

i am sorry i cannot now relish your poetical present as thoroughly as i
feel it deserves; but i do not the less thank lloyd and you for it.

in truth, coleridge, i am perplexed, & at times almost cast down. i am
beset with perplexities. the old hag of a wealthy relation, who took my
aunt off our hands in the beginning of trouble, has found out that she
is "indolent and mulish"--i quote her own words--and that her attachment
to us is so strong that she can never be happy apart. the lady, with
delicate irony, remarks that, if i am not an hypocrite, i shall rejoyce
to receive her again; and that it will be a means of making me more fond
of home to have so dear a friend to come home to! the fact is, she is
jealous of my aunt's bestowing any kind recollections on us, while she
enjoys the patronage of her roof. she says she finds it inconsistent
with her own "ease and tranquility" to keep her any longer, & in fine
summons me to fetch her home. now, much as i should rejoyce to
transplant the poor old creature from the chilling air of such
patronage, yet i know how straitend we are already, how unable already
to answer any demand which sickness or any extraordinary expence may
make. i know this, and all unused as i am to struggle with perplexities
i am somewhat nonplusd, to say no worse. this prevents me from a
thorough relish of what lloyd's kindness and yours have furnished me
with. i thank you tho from my heart, and feel myself not quite alone in
the earth.

before i offer, what alone i have to offer, a few obvious remarks on the
poems you sent me, i can[not] but notice the odd coincidence of two
young men, in one age, carolling their grandmothers. love--what l[loyd]
calls "the feverish and romantic tye"--hath too long domineerd over all
the charities of home: the dear domestic tyes of father, brother,
husband. the amiable and benevolent cowper has a beautiful passage in
his "task,"--some natural and painful reflections on his deceased
parents: and hayley's sweet lines to his mother are notoriously the best
things he ever wrote. cowper's lines, some of them, are--

"how gladly would the man recall to life
the boy's neglected sire; a mother, too.
that softer name, perhaps more gladly still,
might he demand them at the gates of death."

i cannot but smile to see my granny so gayly deck'd forth: tho', i
think, whoever altered "thy" praises to "her" praises, "thy" honoured
memory to "her" honoured memory, did wrong--they best exprest my
feelings. there is a pensive state of recollection, in which the mind is
disposed to apostrophise the departed objects of its attachment, and,
breaking loose from grammatical precision, changes from the 1st to the
3rd, and from the 3rd to the 1st person, just as the random fancy or the
feeling directs. among lloyd's sonnets, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 11th,
are eminently beautiful. i think him too lavish of his expletives; the
_do's_ and _did's_, when they occur too often, bring a quaintness with
them along with their simplicity, or rather air of antiquity which the
patrons of them seem desirous of conveying.

the lines on friday are very pleasing--"yet calls itself in pride of
infancy woman or man," &c., "affection's tottering troop"--are prominent
beauties. another time, when my mind were more at ease, i could be more
particular in my remarks, and i would postpone them now, only i want
some diversion of mind. the _melancholy man_ is a charming piece of
poetry, only the "whys" (with submission) are too many. yet the
questions are too good to be any of 'em omitted. for those lines of
yours, page 18, omitted in magazine, i think the 3 first better
retain'd--the 3 last, which are somewhat simple in the most affronting
sense of the word, better omitted: to this my taste directs me--i have
no claim to prescribe to you. "their slothful loves and dainty
sympathies" is an exquisite line, but you knew _that_ when you wrote
'em, and i trifle in pointing such out. tis altogether the sweetest
thing to me you ever wrote--tis all honey. "no wish profaned my
overwhelmed heart, blest hour, it was a luxury to be"--i recognise
feelings, which i may taste again, if tranquility has not taken his
flight for ever, and i will not believe but i shall be happy, very happy
again. the next poem to your friend is very beautiful: need i instance
the pretty fancy of "the rock's collected tears"--or that original line
"pour'd all its healthful greenness on the soul"?--let it be, since you
asked me, "as neighbouring fountains each reflect the whole"--tho' that
is somewhat harsh; indeed the ending is not so finish'd as the rest,
which if you omit in your forthcoming edition, you will do the volume
wrong, and the very binding will cry out. neither shall you omit the 2
following poems. "the hour when we shall meet again," is fine fancy, tis
true, but fancy catering in the service of the feeling--fetching from
her stores most splendid banquets to satisfy her. do not, do not omit
it. your sonnet to the _river otter_ excludes those equally beautiful
lines, which deserve not to be lost, "as the tired savage," &c., and i
prefer that copy in your _watchman_. i plead for its preference.

another time, i may notice more particularly lloyd's, southey's,
dermody's sonnets. i shrink from them now: my teazing lot makes me too
confused for a clear judgment of things, too selfish for sympathy; and
these ill-digested, meaningless remarks i have imposed on myself as a
task, to lull reflection, as well as to show you i did not neglect
reading your valuable present. return my acknowledgments to lloyd; you
two appear to be about realising an elysium upon earth, and, no doubt, i
shall be happier. take my best wishes. remember me most affectionately
to mrs. c., and give little david hartley--god bless its little
heart!--a kiss for me. bring him up to know the meaning of his christian
name, and what that name (imposed upon him) will demand of him.

c. lamb.

god love you!

i write, for one thing, to say that i shall write no more till you send
me word where you are, for you are so soon to move.

my sister is pretty well, thank god. we think of you very often. god
bless you: continue to be my correspondent, and i will strive to fancy
that this world is _not_ "all barrenness."

[the poetical present, as the late mr. dykes campbell pointed out in
_the atheneum_, june 13, 1891, consisted of lloyd's _poems on the death
of priscilla farmer_, to which lamb had contributed "the grandame," and
of a little privately-printed collection of poems by coleridge and
lloyd, which they had intended to publish, but did not. the pamphlet has
completely vanished. in addition to these two works the poetical present
also comprised another privately-printed collection, a little pamphlet
of twenty-eight sonnets which coleridge had arranged for the purpose of
binding up with those of bowles. it included three of bowles', four of
coleridge's, four of lamb's, four of southey's, and the remainder by
dermody, lloyd, charlotte smith, and others. a copy of this pamphlet is
preserved in the south kensington museum.

"the poems you sent me." this would be lloyd's _poems on the death of
priscilla farmer_. when lamb reprinted "the grandame" in coleridge's
second edition, 1797, he put back the original text.

i now take up mr. dykes campbell's comments on the letter, where it
branches off from the _priscilla farmer_ volume to the vanished pamphlet
of poems by coleridge and lloyd:--


beginning with lloyd's "melancholy man" (first printed in the carlisle
volume of 1795), he [lamb] passes to coleridge's poem on leaving the
honeymoon-cottage at clevedon, "altogether the sweetest thing to me,"
says lamb, "you ever wrote." the verses had appeared in the _monthly
magazine_ two months before.... that lamb's counsel was followed to some
extent may be gathered from a comparison between the text of the
magazine and that of 1797:--

                             "once i saw
     (hallowing his sabbath-day by quietness)
     a wealthy son of commerce saunter by,
     bristowa's citizen: he paus'd, and look'd,
     with a pleas'd sadness, and gazed all around,
     then ey'd our cottage, and gaz'd round again,
     and said, _it was a blessed little place!_
     and we _were_ blessed!"
                               _monthly magazine._

                             "once i saw
     (hallowing his sabbath-day by quietness)
     a wealthy son of commerce saunter by,
     bristowa's citizen. methought it calm'd
     his thirst of idle gold, and made him muse
     with wiser feelings: for he paus'd, and look'd
     with a pleas'd sadness, and gaz'd all around,
     then ey'd our cottage, and gaz'd round again,
     and sigh'd and said, _it was a blessed place._
     and we _were_ blessed."
                                     _poems_, 1797.

it will be observed that coleridge in 1797 inserted some lines which
were not in the magazine. they were probably restored from a ms. copy
lamb had previously seen, and if coleridge did not cancel all that lamb
wisely counselled, he certainly drew the sting of the "affronting
simplicity" by removing the word "little." the comical ambiguity of the
bristol man's exclamation as first reported could hardly have failed to
drive lamb's dull care away for a moment or two.

[in] "the next poem to your friend," ... [lamb is] speaking of
coleridge's lines "to charles lloyd"--those beginning

     "a mount, not wearisome and bare and steep."

in the "forthcoming edition" the poet improved a little the barely
tolerated line, making it read,--

     "as neighb'ring fountains image, each the whole,"

but did not take lamb's hint to omit the five which closed the poem.
lamb, however, got his way--perhaps took it--when the verses were
reprinted in 1803, in the volume he saw through the press for coleridge.

"neither shall you omit the 2 following poems. 'the hour when we shall
meet again' is [only?] a fine fancy, 'tis true, but fancy catering in
the service of the feeling--fetching from her stores most splendid
banquets to satisfy her. do not, do not, omit it."

so wrote lamb of these somewhat slender verses, but his friend had
composed them "during illness and in absence," and lamb in his own
heart-sickness and loneliness detected the reality which underlay the
conventionality of expression. the critic slept, and even when he was
awake again in 1803 was fain to let the lines be reprinted with only the
concession of their worst couplet:--

     "while finely-flushing float her kisses meek,
     like melted rubies, o'er my pallid cheek."

the second of the "2 following poems" was coleridge's "sonnet to the
river otter." the version then before him "excludes," complains lamb,
"those equally beautiful lines which deserve not to be lost, 'as the
tir'd savage,' &c., and i prefer the copy in your _watchman_. i plead
for its preference." this pleading ... was not responded to in the way
lamb wanted, but in the appendix to the 1797 volume coleridge printed
the whole of the poem on an "autumnal evening," to which the "tir'd
savage" properly belonged....

"lloyd's, southey's, dermody's sonnets." lamb here refers to the third
portion of the poetical present--the twenty-eight sonnets to be bound up
with those of bowles. thomas dermody (1775-1802) was an irish poet of
squalidly dissolute life. a collection of his verses appeared in 1792.]




letter 18


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

dec. 10th, 1796.

i had put my letter into the post rather hastily, not expecting to have
to acknowledge another from you so soon. this morning's present has made
me alive again: my last night's epistle was childishly querulous; but
you have put a little life into me, and i will thank you for your
remembrance of me, while my sense of it is yet warm; for if i linger a
day or two i may use the same phrase of acknowledgment, or similar; but
the feeling that dictates it now will be gone. i shall send you a _caput
mortuum_, not a _cor vivens_. thy watchman's, thy bellman's, verses, i
do retort upon thee, thou libellous varlet,--why, you cried the hours
yourself, and who made you so proud? but i submit, to show my humility,
most implicitly to your dogmas. i reject entirely the copy of verses you
reject. with regard to my leaving off versifying, you have said so many
pretty things, so many fine compliments, ingeniously decked out in the
garb of sincerity, and undoubtedly springing from a present feeling
somewhat like sincerity, that you might melt the most un-muse-ical
soul,--did you not (now for a rowland compliment for your profusion of
olivers)--did you not in your very epistle, by the many pretty fancies
and profusion of heart displayed in it, dissuade and discourage me from
attempting anything after you. at present i have not leisure to make
verses, nor anything approaching to a fondness for the exercise. in the
ignorant present time, who can answer for the future man? "at lovers'
perjuries jove laughs"--and poets have sometimes a disingenuous way of
forswearing their occupation. this though is not my case. the tender
cast of soul, sombred with melancholy and subsiding recollections, is
favourable to the sonnet or the elegy; but from

     "the sainted growing woof,
     the teasing troubles keep aloof."

the music of poesy may charm for a while the importunate teasing cares
of life; but the teased and troubled man is not in a disposition to make
that music.

you sent me some very sweet lines relative to burns, but it was at a
time when, in my highly agitated and perhaps distorted state of mind, i
thought it a duty to read 'em hastily and burn 'em. i burned all my own
verses, all my book of extracts from beaumont and fletcher and a
thousand sources: i burned a little journal of my foolish passion which
i had a long time kept--

     "noting ere they past away
     the little lines of yesterday."

i almost burned all your letters,--i did as bad, i lent 'em to a friend
to keep out of my brother's sight, should he come and make inquisition
into our papers, for, much as he dwelt upon your conversation while you
were among us, and delighted to be with you, it has been his fashion
ever since to depreciate and cry you down,--you were the cause of my
madness--you and your damned foolish sensibility and melancholy--and he
lamented with a true brotherly feeling that we ever met, even as the
sober citizen, when his son went astray upon the mountains of parnassus,
is said to have "cursed wit and poetry and pope." i quote wrong, but no
matter. these letters i lent to a friend to be out of the way for a
season; but i have claimed them in vain, and shall not cease to regret
their loss. your packets, posterior to the date of my misfortunes,
commencing with that valuable consolatory epistle, are every day
accumulating--they are sacred things with me.

publish your _burns_ when and how you like, it will be new to me,--my
memory of it is very confused, and tainted with unpleasant associations.
burns was the god of my idolatry, as bowles of yours. i am jealous of
your fraternising with bowles, when i think you relish him more than
burns or my old favourite, cowper. but you conciliate matters when you
talk of the "divine chit-chat" of the latter: by the expression i see
you thoroughly relish him. i love mrs. coleridge for her excuses an
hundredfold more dearly than if she heaped "line upon line,"
out-hannah-ing hannah more, and had rather hear you sing "did a very
little baby" by your family fire-side, than listen to you when you were
repeating one of bowles's sweetest sonnets in your sweet manner, while
we two were indulging sympathy, a solitary luxury, by the fireside at
the salutation. yet have i no higher ideas of heaven. your company was
one "cordial in this melancholy vale"--the remembrance of it is a
blessing partly, and partly a curse.

when i can abstract myself from things present, i can enjoy it with a
freshness of relish; but it more constantly operates to an unfavourable
comparison with the uninteresting; converse i always and _only_ can
partake in. not a soul loves bowles here; scarce one has heard of burns;
few but laugh at me for reading my testament--they talk a language i
understand not: i conceal sentiments that would be a puzzle to them. i
can only converse with you by letter and with the dead in their books.
my sister, indeed, is all i can wish in a companion; but our spirits are
alike poorly, our reading and knowledge from the self-same sources, our
communication with the scenes of the world alike narrow: never having
kept separate company, or any "company" "_together_"--never having read
separate books, and few books _together_--what knowledge have we to
convey to each other? in our little range of duties and connexions, how
few sentiments can take place, without friends, with few books, with a
taste for religion rather than a strong religious habit! we need some
support, some leading-strings to cheer and direct us. you talk very
wisely, and be not sparing of _your advice_. continue to remember us,
and to show us you do remember us: we will take as lively an interest in
what concerns you and yours. all i can add to your happiness, will be
sympathy. you can add to mine _more_; you can teach me wisdom. i am
indeed an unreasonable correspondent; but i was unwilling to let my last
night's letter go off without this qualifier: you will perceive by this
my mind is easier, and you will rejoice. i do not expect or wish you to
write, till you are moved; and of course shall not, till you announce to
me that event, think of writing myself. love to mrs. coleridge and david
hartley, and my kind remembrance to lloyd, if he is with you.

c. lamb.

i will get "nature and art,"--have not seen it yet--nor any of jeremy
taylor's works.

[the reference to the bellman's verses (the bellman, or watchman, used
to leave verses at the houses on his beat at easter as a reminder of his
deserts) is not quite clear. lamb evidently had submitted for the new
volume some lines which coleridge would not pass--possibly the poem in
letter no. 16.

coleridge some time before had sent to lamb the very sweet lines
relative to burns, under the title, "to a friend who had declared his
intention of writing no more poetry."

"did a very little baby." in the appendix to vol. i. of the 1847 edition
of the _biog. lit._, sara coleridge writes, concerning children and
domestic evenings, "'did a very little babby make a very great noise?'
is the first line of a nursery song, in which mr. coleridge recorded
some of his experience on this recondite subject." the song has
disappeared.

_nature and art_ was mrs. inchbald's story, published in 1796. lamb
later became an enthusiast for jeremy taylor.]




letter 19


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[dated outside: jan. 2, 1797.]

your success in the higher species of the ode is such, as bespeaks you
born for atchievements of loftier enterprize than to linger in the lowly
train of songsters and sonneteurs. sincerely i think your ode one of the
finest i have read. the opening is in the spirit of the sublimest
allegory. the idea of the "skirts of the departing year, seen far
onwards, waving on the wind" is one of those noble hints at which the
reader's imagination is apt to kindle into grand conceptions. do the
words "impetuous" and "solemnize" harmonize well in the same line? think
and judge. in the 2d strophe, there seems to be too much play of fancy
to be consistent with that continued elevation we are taught to expect
from the strain of the foregoing. the parenthized line (by the way i
abominate parentheses in this kind of poetry) at the beginning of 7th
page, and indeed all that gradual description of the throes and pangs of
nature in childbirth, i do not much like, and those 4 first lines,--i
mean "tomb gloom anguish and languish"--rise not above mediocrity. in
the epode, your mighty genius comes again: "i marked ambition" &c. thro'
the whole epod indeed you carry along our souls in a full spring tide of
feeling and imaginat'n. here is the "storm of music," as cowper
expresses it. would it not be more abrupt "why does the northern
conqueress stay" or "where does the northern conqueress stay"?--this
change of measure, rather than the feebler "ah! whither", "foul her life
and dark her tomb, mighty army of the dead, dance like deathflies" &c.:
here is genius, here is poetry, rapid, irresistible. the concluding
line, is it not a personif: without use? "nec deus intersit"--except
indeed for rhyme sake. would the laws of strophe and antistrophe, which,
if they are as unchangeable, i suppose are about as wise, [as] the mede
and persian laws, admit of expunging that line altogether, and changing
the preceding one to "and he, poor madman, deemd it quenchd in endless
night?"--_fond_ madman or _proud_ madman if you will, but poor is more
contemptuous. if i offer alterations of my own to your poetry, and admit
not yours in mine, it is upon the principle of a present to a rich man
being graciously accepted, and the same present to a poor man being
considered as in insult. to return--the antistrophe that follows is not
inferior in grandeur or original: but is i think not faultless--e: g:
how is memory _alone_, when all the etherial multitude are there?
reflect. again "storiedst thy sad hours" is harsh, i need not tell you,
but you have gained your point in expressing much meaning in few words:
"purple locks and snow white glories" "mild arcadians ever blooming"
"seas of milk and ships of amber" these are things the muse talks about
when, to borrow h. walpole's witty phrase, she is not finely-phrenzied,
only a little light-headed, that's all. "purple locks." they may manage
things differently in fairy land, but your "golden tresses" are more to
my fancy. the spirit of the earth is a most happy conceit, and the last
line is one of the luckiest i ever heard--"_and stood up beautiful_
before the cloudy seat." i cannot enough admire it. 'tis somehow
picturesque in the very sound. the 2d antistrophe (what is the meaning
of these things?) is fine and faultless (or to vary the alliteration and
not diminish the affectation) beautiful and blameless. i only except to
the last line as meaningless after the preceding, and useless
entirely--besides, why disjoin "nature and the world" here, when you had
confounded both in their pregnancy: "the common earth and nature,"
recollect, a little before--and there is a dismal superfluity in the
unmeaning vocable "unhurld"--the worse, as it is so evidently a
rhyme-fetch.--"death like he dozes" is a prosaic conceit--indeed all the
epode as far as "brother's corse" i most heartily commend to
annihilation. the enthusiast of the lyre should not be so feebly, so
tediously, delineative of his own feelings; 'tis not the way to become
"master of our affections." the address to albion is very agreeable, and
concludes even beautifully: "speaks safety to his island
child"--"sworded"--epithet _i_ would change for "cruel."

the immediately succeeding lines are prosaic: "mad avarice" is an
unhappy combination; and "the coward distance yet with kindling pride"
is not only reprehensible for the antithetical turn, but as it is a
quotation: "safe distance" and "coward distance" you have more than once
had recourse to before--and the lyric muse, in her enthusiasm, should
talk the language of her country, something removed from common use,
something "recent," unborrowed. the dreams of destruction "soothing her
fierce solitude," are vastly grand and terrific: still you weaken the
effect by that superfluous and easily-conceived parenthesis that
finishes the page. the foregoing image, few minds _could_ have
conceived, few tongues could have so cloath'd; "muttring destempered
triumph" &c. is vastly fine. i hate imperfect beginnings and endings.
now your concluding stanza is worthy of so fine an ode. the beginning
was awakening and striking; the ending is soothing and solemn--are you
serious when you ask whether you shall admit this ode? it would be
strange infatuation to leave out your chatterton; mere insanity to
reject this. unless you are fearful that the splendid thing may be a
means of "eclipsing many a softer satellite" that twinkles thro' the
volume. neither omit the annex'd little poem. for my part, detesting
alliterations, i should make the 1st line "away, with this fantastic
pride of woe." well may you relish bowles's allegory. i need only tell
you, i have read, and will only add, that i dislike ambition's name
_gilded_ on his helmet-cap, and that i think, among the more striking
personages you notice, you omitted the _most_ striking, remorse! "he saw
the trees--the sun--then hied him to his cave again"!!! the 2d stanza of
mania is superfl: the 1st was never exceeded. the 2d is too methodic:
for _her_. with all its load of beauties, i am more _affected_ with the
6 first stanzas of the elegiac poem written during sickness. tell me
your feelings. if the fraternal sentiment conveyed in the following
lines will atone for the total want of anything like merit or genius in
it, i desire you will print it next after my other sonnet to my sister.

friend of my earliest years, & childish days,
my joys, my sorrows, thou with me hast shared
companion dear; & we alike have fared
poor pilgrims we, thro' life's unequal ways
it were unwisely done, should we refuse
to cheer our path, as featly as we may,
our lonely path to cheer, as travellers use
with merry song, quaint tale, or roundelay.
and we will sometimes talk past troubles o'er,
of mercies shewn, & all our sickness heal'd,
and in his judgments god remembring love;
and we will learn to praise god evermore
for those "glad tidings of great joy" reveal'd
by that sooth messenger, sent from above.

1797.

if you think the epithet "sooth" quaint, substitute "blest messenger." i
hope you are printing my sonnets, as i directed you--particularly the
2d. "methinks" &c. with my last added 6 lines at ye end: and all of 'em
as i last made 'em.

this has been a sad long letter of business, with no room in it for what
honest bunyan terms heart-work. i have just room left to congratulate
you on your removal to stowey; to wish success to all your projects; to
"bid fair peace" be to that house; to send my love and best wishes,
breathed warmly, after your dear sara, and her little david hartley. if
lloyd be with you, bid him write to me: i feel to whom i am obliged
primarily for two very friendly letters i have received already from
him. a dainty sweet book that "art and nature" is. i am at present
re-re-reading priestley's examinat of the scotch drs: how the rogue
strings 'em up! three together! you have no doubt read that clear,
strong, humorous, most entertaining piece of reasoning. if not, procure
it, and be exquisitely amused. i wish i could get more of priestley's
works. can you recommend me to any more books, easy of access, such as
circulating shops afford? god bless you and yours.

poor mary is very unwell with a sore throat and a slight species of
scarlet fever. god bless her too.

monday morning, at office.

[coleridge had just published in quarto his _ode on the departing year_.
in order that lamb's letter may be intelligible it is necessary, i
think, to give the text of this edition in full. it will be found in the
appendix to this volume. lamb returns to his criticism in the next
letter.

the "annexed little poem" was that "addressed to a young man of
fortune," which began, and still begins, "hence that fantastic
wantonness of woe."

bowies' allegory was the poem, "hope, an allegorical sketch," recently
published.

the poem was not included in the 1797 volume, but was printed in the
_monthly magazine_, october, 1797. coleridge had moved to his cottage at
nether stowey on the last day of 1796.

priestley's book would be _an examination of dr. reid's inquiry into the
human mind on the principles of common sense, dr. beattie's essay on the
nature and immutability of truth, and dr. oswald's appeal to common
sense in behalf of religion_, 1774.]




letter 20


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[p.m. jan. 10, 1797.]

saturday.

i am completely reconciled to that second strophe, and wa[i]ve all
objection. in spite of the grecian lyrists, i persist on [in] thinking
your brief personification of madness useless; reverence forbids me to
say, impertinent. golden locks and snow white glories are as incongruous
as your former, and if the great italian painters, of whom my friend
knows about as much as the man in the moon, if these great gentlemen be
on your side, i see no harm in retaining the purple--the glories that i
have observed to encircle the heads of saints and madonnas in those old
paintings have been mostly of a dirty drab-color'd yellow--a dull
gambogium. keep your old line: it will excite a confused kind of
pleasurable idea in the reader's mind, not clear enough to be called a
conception, nor just enough, i think, to reduce to painting. it is a
rich line, you say, and riches hide a many faults. i maintain, that in
the 2d antist: you _do_ disjoin nature and the world, and contrary to
your conduct in the 2d strophe. "nature joins her groans"--joins with
_whom_, a god's name, but the world or earth in line preceding? but this
is being over curious, i acknowledge. nor _did_ i call the _last_ line
useless, i only objected to "unhurld." i cannot be made to like the
former part of that 2d epode; i cannot be made to feel it, as i do the
parallel places in isaiah, jeremy and daniel. whether it is that in the
present case the rhyme impairs the efficacy; or that the circumstances
are feigned, and we are conscious of a made up lye in the case, and the
narrative is too long winded to preserve the semblance of truth; or that
lines 8. 9. 10. 14 in partic: 17 and 18 are mean and unenthusiastic; or
that lines 5 to 8 in their change of rhyme shew like art--i don't know,
but it strikes me as something meant to affect, and failing in its
purpose. remember my waywardness of feeling is single, and singly stands
opposed to all your friends, and what is one among many! this i know,
that your quotations from the prophets have never escaped me, and never
fail'd to affect me strongly. i hate that simile. i am glad you have
amended that parenthesis in the account of destruction. i like it well
now. only utter [? omit] that history of child-bearing, and all will do
well. let the obnoxious epode remain, to terrify such of your friends as
are willing to be terrified. i think i would omit the notes, not as not
good per se, but as uncongenial with the dignity of the ode. i need not
repeat my wishes to have my little sonnets printed verbatim my last way.
in particular, i fear lest you should prefer printing my first sonnet,
as you have done more than once, "did the wand of merlin wave"? it looks
so like _mr._ merlin, the ingenious successor of the immortal merlin,
now living in good health and spirits, and nourishing in magical
reputation in oxford street; and on my life, one half who read it would
understand it so. do put 'em forth finally as i have, in various
letters, settled it; for first a man's self is to be pleased, and then
his friends,--and, of course the greater number of his friends, if they
differ inter se. thus taste may safely be put to the vote. i do long to
see our names together--not for vanity's sake, and naughty pride of
heart altogether, for not a living soul, i know or am intimate with,
will scarce read the book--so i shall gain nothing quoad famam,--and yet
there is a little vanity mixes in it, i cannot help denying. i am aware
of the unpoetical cast of the 6 last lines of my last sonnet, and think
myself unwarranted in smuggling so tame a thing into the book; only the
sentiments of those 6 lines are thoroughly congenial to me in my state
of mind, and i wish to accumulate perpetuating tokens of my affection to
poor mary; that it has no originality in its cast, nor anything in the
feelings, but what is common and natural to thousands, nor aught
properly called poetry, i see; still it will tend to keep present to my
mind a view of things which i ought to indulge. these 6 lines, too, have
not, to a reader, a connectedness with the foregoing. omit it, if you
like.--what a treasure it is to my poor indolent and unemployed mind,
thus to lay hold on a subject to talk about, tho' 'tis but a sonnet and
that of the lowest order. how mournfully inactive i am!--'tis night:
good-night.

my sister, i thank god, is nigh recovered. she was seriously ill. do, in
your next letter, and that right soon, give me some satisfaction
respecting your present situation at stowey. is it a farm you have got?
and what does your worship know about farming? coleridge, i want you to
write an epic poem. nothing short of it can satisfy the vast capacity of
true poetic genius. having one great end to direct all your poetical
faculties to, and on which to lay out your hopes, your ambition, will
shew you to what you are equal. by the sacred energies of milton, by the
dainty sweet and soothing phantasies of honeytongued spenser, i adjure
you to attempt the epic. or do something more ample than writing an
occasional brief ode or sonnet; something "to make yourself for ever
known,--to make the age to come your own". but i prate; doubtless you
meditate something. when you are exalted among the lords of epic fame, i
shall recall with pleasure, and exultingly, the days of your humility,
when you disdained not to put forth in the same volume with mine, your
religious musings, and that other poem from the joan of arc, those
promising first fruits of high renown to come. you have learning, you
have fancy, you have enthusiasm--you have strength and amplitude of wing
enow for flights like those i recommend. in the vast and unexplored
regions of fairyland, there is ground enough unfound and uncultivated;
search there, and realize your favourite susquehanah scheme. in all our
comparisons of taste, i do not know whether i have ever heard your
opinion of a poet, very dear to me, the now out of fashion cowley--favor
me with your judgment of him, and tell me if his prose essays, in
particular, as well as no inconsiderable part of his verse, be not
delicious. i prefer the graceful rambling of his essays, even to the
courtly elegance and ease of addison--abstracting from this the latter's
exquisite humour. why is not your poem on burns in the monthly magazine?
i was much disappointed. i have a pleasurable but confused remembrance
of it.

when the little volume is printed, send me 3 or 4, at all events not
more than 6 copies, and tell me if i put you to any additional expence,
by printing with you. i have no thought of the kind, and in that case,
must reimburse you. my epistle is a model of unconnectedness, but i have
no partic: subject to write on, and must proportion my scribble in some
degree to the increase of postage. it is not quite fair, considering how
burdensome your correspondence from different quarters must be, to add
to it with so little shew of reason. i will make an end for this
evening. sunday even:--farewell.

priestly, whom i sin in almost adoring, speaks of "such a choice of
company, as tends to keep up that right bent, and firmness of mind,
which a necessary intercourse with the world would otherwise warp and
relax. such fellowship is the true balsam of life, its cement is
infinitely more durable than that of the friendships of the world, and
it looks for its proper fruit, and complete gratification, to the life
beyond the grave." is there a possible chance for such an one as me to
realize in this world, such friendships? where am i to look for 'em?
what testimonials shall i bring of my being worthy of such friendship?
alas! the great and good go together in separate herds, and leave such
as me to lag far far behind in all intellectual, and far more grievous
to say, in all moral, accomplishments. coleridge, i have not one truly
elevated character among my acquaintance: not one christian: not one but
undervalues christianity. singly what am i to do? wesley (have you read
his life? was _he_ not an elevated character?) wesley has said,
"religion is not a solitary thing." alas! it necessarily is so with me,
or next to solitary. 'tis true, you write to me. but correspondence by
letter, and personal intimacy, are very widely different. do, do write
to me, and do some good to my mind, already how much "warped and
relaxed" by the world!--'tis the conclusion of another evening. good
night. god have us all in his keeping. if you are sufficiently at
leisure, oblige me with an account of your plan of life at stowey--your
literary occupations and prospects--in short make me acquainted with
every circumstance, which, as relating to you, can be interesting to me.
are you yet a berkleyan? make me one. i rejoice in being, speculatively,
a necessarian. would to god, i were habitually a practical one. confirm
me in the faith of that great and glorious doctrine, and keep me steady
in the contemplation of it. you sometime since exprest an intention you
had of finishing some extensive work on the evidences of natural and
revealed religion. have you let that intention go? or are you doing any
thing towards it? make to yourself other ten talents. my letter is full
of nothingness. i talk of nothing. but i must talk. i love to write to
you. i take a pride in it. it makes me think less meanly of myself. it
makes me think myself not totally disconnected from the better part of
mankind. i know, i am too dissatisfied with the beings around me,--but i
cannot help occasionally exclaiming "woe is me, that i am constrained to
dwell with meshech, and to have my habitation among the tents of
kedar"--i know i am no ways better in practice than my neighbours--but i
have a taste for religion, an occasional earnest aspiration after
perfection, which they have not. i gain nothing by being with such as
myself--we encourage one another in mediocrity--i am always longing to
be with men more excellent than myself. all this must sound odd to you;
but these are my predominant feelings, when i sit down to write to you,
and i should put force upon my mind, were i to reject them. yet i
rejoyce, and feel my privilege with gratitude, when i have been reading
some wise book, such as i have just been reading--priestley on
philosophical necessity--in the thought that i enjoy a kind of
communion, a kind of friendship even, with the great and good. books are
to me instead of friends. i wish they did not resemble the latter in
their scarceness.--and how does little david hartley? "ecquid in
antiquam virtutem?"--does his mighty name work wonders yet upon his
little frame, and opening mind? i did not distinctly understand
you,--you don't mean to make an actual ploughman of him? mrs. c---- is
no doubt well,--give my kindest respects to her. is lloyd with you
yet?--are you intimate with southey? what poems is he about to
publish--he hath a most prolific brain, and is indeed a most sweet poet.
but how can you answer all the various mass of interrogation i have put
to you in the course of this sheet. write back just what you like, only
write something, however brief. i have now nigh finished my page, and
got to the end of another evening (monday evening)--and my eyes are
heavy and sleepy, and my brain unsuggestive. i have just heart enough
awake to say good night once more, and god love you my dear friend, god
love us all. mary bears an affectionate remembrance of you.

charles lamb.

[the criticisms contained in the first paragraph bear upon coleridge's
"ode on the departing year," which had already appeared twice, in the
_cambridge intelligencer_ and in a quarto issued by cottle, and was now
being revised for the second edition of the _poems_.

the personification of madness was contained in the line, afterwards
omitted:--

for still does madness roam on guilt's black dizzy height.

lamb's objection to this line, considering his home circumstances at the
time, was very natural. in antistrophe i. coleridge originally said of
the ethereal multitude in heaven--

whose purple locks with snow-white glories shone.

in the 1797 _poems_ the line ran--

whose wreathed locks with snow-white glories shone;

and in the final version--

whose locks with wreaths, whose wreaths with glories shone.

coleridge must have supported his case, in the letter which lamb is
answering, by a reference to the italian painters.

coleridge in the 1797 edition of his poems made no alteration to meet
lamb's strictures. the simile that lamb hated is, i imagine, that of the
soldier on the war field. "the history of child-bearing" referred to is
the passage at the end of strophe ii. to the quarto coleridge had
appended various notes. in 1797 he had only three, and added an
argument.

the reference to merlin will be explained by a glance at the parallel
sonnets above. merlin was entirely coleridge's idea. a conjuror of that
name was just then among london's attractions.

the "last sonnet," which was not the last in the 1797 volume, but the
6th, was that beginning "if from my lips" (see first letter).

in connection with lamb's question on the stowey husbandry, the
following quotation from a letter from coleridge to the rev. j. p.
estlin, belonging to this period, is interesting;--

our house is better than we expected--there is a comfortable bedroom and
sitting-room for c. lloyd, and another for us, a room for nanny, a
kitchen, and out-house. before our door a clear brook runs of very soft
water; and in the back yard is a nice _well_ of fine spring water. we
have a very pretty garden, and large enough to find us vegetables and
employment, and i am already an expert gardener, and both my hands can
exhibit a callum as testimonials of their industry. we have likewise a
sweet orchard.

writing a little before this to charles lloyd, senior, coleridge had
said: "my days i shall devote to the acquirement of practical husbandry
and horticulture."

the poem on burns was that "to a friend [lamb] who had declared his
intention of writing no more poetry." it was printed first in a bristol
paper and then in the _annual anthology_, 1800.

priestley's remark is in the dedication to john lee, esq., of lincoln's
inn, of "a free discussion of the doctrines of materialism and
philosophical necessity in a correspondence between dr. price and dr.
priestley," etc., included in _disquisitions relating to matter and
spirit_, vol. iii., 1778. the discussion arose from the publication by
priestley of _the doctrine of philosophical necessity illustrated_,
which itself is an appendage to _disquisitions relating to matter and
spirit_.

three lives at least of john wesley were published in the two years
following his death in 1791. coleridge later studied wesley closely, for
he added valuable notes to southey's life (see the 1846 edition).

"a berkleyan," _i.e._, a follower of bishop berkeley (1685-1753), who in
his _new theory of vision_ and later works maintained that "what we call
matter has no actual existence, and that the impressions which we
believe ourselves to receive from it are not, in fact, derived from
anything external to ourselves, but are produced within us by a certain
disposition of the mind, the immediate operation of god" (benham's
_dictionary of religion_).

coleridge when sending southey one version of his poem to charles lamb,
entitled "this lime-tree bower my prison" (to which we shall come
later), in july, 1797, appended to the following passage the note, "you
remember i am a _berkleian_":--

struck with joy's deepest calm, and gazing round
on the wide view, may gaze till all doth seem
less gross than bodily; a living thing
that acts upon the mind, and with such hues
as clothe the almighty spirit, when he makes
spirits perceive his presence!

"a necessarian." we should now say a fatalist.

coleridge's work on the "evidences of natural and revealed religion,"
which has before been mentioned, was, if ever begun, never completed.]




letter 21


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[dated at end: january 18, 1797.]

dear col,--you have learnd by this time, with surprise, no doubt, that
lloyd is with me in town. the emotions i felt on his coming so unlooked
for are not ill expressed in what follows, & what, if you do not object
to them as too personal, & to the world obscure, or otherwise wanting in
worth, i should wish to make a part of our little volume.

i shall be sorry if that vol comes out, as it necessarily must do,
unless you print those very schoolboyish verses i sent you on not
getting leave to come down to bristol last summer. i say i shall be
sorry that i have addrest you in nothing which can appear in our joint
volume.

so frequently, so habitually as you dwell on my thoughts, 'tis some
wonder those thoughts came never yet in contact with a poetical
mood--but you dwell in my heart of hearts, and i love you in all the
naked honesty of prose. god bless you, and all your little domestic
circle--my tenderest remembrances to your beloved sara, & a smile and a
kiss from me to your dear dear little david hartley--the verses i refer
to above, slightly amended, i have sent (forgetting to ask your leave,
tho' indeed i gave them only your initials) to the month: mag: where
they may possibly appear next month, and where i hope to recognise your
poem on burns.


to charles lloyd, an unexpected visitor

alone, obscure, without a friend,
a cheerless, solitary thing,
why seeks my lloyd the stranger out?
what offring can the stranger bring

of social scenes, home-bred delights,
that him in aught compensate may
for stowey's pleasant winter nights,
for loves & friendships far away?

in brief oblivion to forego
friends, such as thine, so justly dear,
and be awhile with me content
to stay, a kindly loiterer, here--

for this a gleam of random joy,
hath flush'd my unaccustom'd cheek,
and, with an o'er-charg'd bursting heart,
i feel the thanks, i cannot speak.

o! sweet are all the muses' lays,
and sweet the charm of matin bird--
'twas long, since these estranged ears
the sweeter voice of friend had heard.

the voice hath spoke: the pleasant sounds
in memory's ear, in after time
shall live, to sometimes rouse a tear,
and sometimes prompt an honest rhyme.

for when the transient charm is fled,
and when the little week is o'er,
to cheerless, friendless solitude
when i return, as heretofore--

long, long, within my aching heart,
the grateful sense shall cherishd be;
i'll think less meanly of myself,
that lloyd will sometimes think on me.

1797.

o col: would to god you were in london with us, or we two at stowey with
you all. lloyd takes up his abode at the bull & mouth inn,--the cat &
salutation would have had a charm more forcible for me. _o noctes
caenaeque deum!_ anglice--welch rabbits, punch, & poesy.

should you be induced to publish those very schoolboyish verses, print
'em as they will occur, if at all, in the month: mag: yet i should feel
ashamed that to you i wrote nothing better. but they are too personal, &
almost trifling and obscure withal. some lines of mine to cowper were in
last month: mag: they have not body of thought enough to plead for the
retaining of 'em.

my sister's kind love to you all.

c. lamb.

[the verses to lloyd were included in coleridge's 1797 volume; but the
verses concerning the frustrated bristol holiday were omitted.
concerning this visit to london charles lloyd wrote to his brother
robert: "i left charles lamb very warmly interested in his favour, and
have kept up a regular correspondence with him ever since; he is a most
interesting young man." only two letters from lamb to charles lloyd have
survived.

"we two"--lamb and lloyd. not lamb and his sister.]




letter 22


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[begun sunday, february 5, 1797.
dated on address by mistake: january 5, 1797.]

sunday morning.--you cannot surely mean to degrade the joan of arc into
a pot girl. you are not going, i hope, to annex to that most splendid
ornament of southey's poem all this cock and a bull story of joan the
publican's daughter of neufchatel, with the lamentable episode of a
waggoner, his wife, and six children; the texture will be most
lamentably disproportionate. the first forty or fifty lines of these
addenda are, no doubt, in their way, admirable, too; but many would
prefer the joan of southey.

"on mightiest deeds to brood of shadowy vastness, such as made my heart
throb fast. anon i paused, and in a state of half expectance listen'd to
the wind;" "they wonder'd at me, who had known me once a chearful
careless damsel;" "the eye, that of the circling throng and of the
visible world unseeing, saw the shapes of holy phantasy;" i see nothing
in your description of the maid equal to these. there is a fine
originality certainly in those lines--"for she had lived in this bad
world as in a place of tombs, and touch'd not the pollutions of the
dead"--but your "fierce vivacity" is a faint copy of the "fierce &
terrible benevolence" of southey. added to this, that it will look like
rivalship in you, & extort a comparison with s,--i think to your
disadvantage. and the lines, consider'd in themselves as an addition to
what you had before written (strains of a far higher mood), are but such
as madame fancy loves in some of her more familiar moods, at such times
as she has met noll goldsmith, & walk'd and talk'd with him, calling him
old acquaintance. southey certainly has no pretensions to vie with you
in the sublime of poetry; but he tells a plain tale better than you. i
will enumerate some woeful blemishes, some of 'em sad deviations from
that simplicity which was your aim. "hail'd who might be near" (the
canvas-coverture moving, by the by, is laughable); "a woman & six
children" (by the way,--why not nine children, it would have been just
half as pathetic again): "statues of sleep they seem'd." "frost-mangled
wretch:" "green putridity:" "hail'd him immortal" (rather ludicrous
again): "voiced a sad and simple tale" (abominable!): "unprovender'd:"
"such his tale:" "ah! suffering to the height of what was suffer'd" (a
most _insufferable line_): "amazements of affright:" "the hot sore brain
attributes its own hues of ghastliness and torture" (what shocking
confusion of ideas!). in these delineations of common & natural
feelings, in the familiar walks of poetry, you seem to resemble
montauban dancing with roubigne's tenants, "much of his native loftiness
remained in the execution." i was reading your religious musings the
other day, & sincerely i think it the noblest poem in the language, next
after the paradise lost; & even that was not made the vehicle of such
grand truths. "there is one mind," &c., down to "almighty's throne," are
without a rival in the whole compass of my poetical reading. "stands in
the sun, & with no partial gaze views all creation"--i wish i could have
written those lines. i rejoyce that i am able to relish them. the
loftier walks of pindus are your proper region. there you have no
compeer in modern times. leave the lowlands, unenvied, in possession of
such men as cowper & southey. thus am i pouring balsam into the wounds i
may have been inflicting on my poor friend's vanity. in your notice of
southey's new volume you omit to mention the most pleasing of all, the
miniature "there were who form'd high hopes and flattering ones of thee,
young robert. spirit of spenser!--was the wanderer wrong?" fairfax i
have been in quest of a long time. johnson in his life of waller gives a
most delicious specimen of him, & adds, in the true manner of that
delicate critic, as well as amiable man, "it may be presumed that this
old version will not be much read after the elegant translation of my
friend, mr. hoole." i endeavour'd--i wish'd to gain some idea of tasso
from this mr. hoole, the great boast and ornament of the india house,
but soon desisted. i found him more vapid than smallest small beer
sun-vinegared. your dream, down to that exquisite line--"i can't tell
half his adventures," is a most happy resemblance of chaucer. the
remainder is so so. the best line, i think, is, "he belong'd, i believe,
to the witch melancholy." by the way, when will our volume come out?
don't delay it till you have written a new joan of arc. send what
letters you please by me, & in any way you choose, single or double. the
india co. is better adapted to answer the cost than the generality of my
friend's correspondents,--such poor & honest dogs as john thelwall,
particularly. i cannot say i know colson, at least intimately. i once
supped with him & allen. i think his manners very pleasing. i will not
tell you what i think of lloyd, for he may by chance come to see this
letter, and that thought puts a restraint on me. i cannot think what
subject would suit your epic genius; some philosophical subject, i
conjecture, in which shall be blended the sublime of poetry & of
science. your proposed hymns will be a fit preparatory study wherewith
"to discipline your young noviciate soul." i grow dull; i'll go walk
myself out of my dulness.

_sunday night_.--you & sara are very good to think so kindly & so
favourably of poor mary. i would to god all did so too. but i very much
fear she must not think of coming home in my father's lifetime. it is
very hard upon her. but our circumstances are peculiar, & we must submit
to them. god be praised she is so well as she is. she bears her
situation as one who has no right to complain. my poor old aunt, whom
you have seen, the kindest, goodest creature to me when i was at school;
who used to toddle there to bring me fag, when i, school-boy like, only
despised her for it, & used to be ashamed to see her come & sit herself
down on the old coal hole steps as you went into the old grammar school,
& opend her apron & bring out her bason, with some nice thing she had
caused to be saved for me--the good old creature is now lying on her
death bed. i cannot bear to think on her deplorable state. to the shock
she received on that our evil day, from which she never completely
recovered, i impute her illness. she says, poor thing, she is glad she
is come home to die with me. i was always her favourite: "no after
friendship e'er can raise the endearments of our early days, nor e'er
the heart such fondness prove, as when it first began to love." lloyd
has kindly left me for a keep-sake, john woolman. you have read it, he
says, & like it. will you excuse one short extract? i think it could not
have escaped you:--"small treasure to a resigned mind is sufficient. how
happy is it to be content with a little, to live in humility, & feel
that in us which breathes out this language--abba! father!"--i am almost
ashamed to patch up a letter in this miscellaneous sort; but i please
myself in the thought, that anything from me will be acceptable to you.
i am rather impatient, childishly so, to see our names affixed to the
same common volume. send me two, when it does come out; 2 will be
enough--or indeed 1--but 2 better. i have a dim recollection that, when
in town, you were talking of the origin of evil as a most prolific
subject for a long poem. why not adopt it, coleridge? there would be
room for imagination. or the description (from a vision or dream,
suppose) of an utopia in one of the planets (the moon, for instance). or
a five days' dream, which shall illustrate, in sensible imagery,
hartley's 5 motives to conduct:--sensation (1), imagination (2),
ambition (3), sympathy (4), theopathy (5). 1st banquets, music, etc.,
effeminacy,--and their insufficiency. 2d "beds of hyacinth & roses,
where young adonis oft reposes;" "fortunate isles;" "the pagan elysium,"
etc., etc.; poetical pictures; antiquity as pleasing to the
fancy;--their emptiness, madness, etc. 3d warriors, poets; some famous,
yet more forgotten, their fame or oblivion now alike indifferent, pride,
vanity, etc. 4th all manner of pitiable stories, in spenser-like
verse--love--friendship, relationship, &c. 5th hermits--christ and his
apostles--martyrs--heaven--&c., etc. an imagination like yours, from
these scanty hints, may expand into a thousand great ideas--if indeed
you at all comprehend my scheme, which i scarce do myself.

_monday morn._--"a london letter. 9-1/2." look you, master poet, i have
remorse as well as another man, & my bowels can sound upon occasion. but
i must put you to this charge, for i cannot keep back my protest,
however ineffectual, against the annexing your latter lines to those
former--this putting of new wine into old bottles. this my duty done, i
will cease from writing till you invent some more reasonable mode of
conveyance. well may the "ragged followers of the nine" set up for
flocci-nauci-what-do-you-call-'em-ists! and i do not wonder that in
their splendid visions of utopias in america they protest against the
admission of those _yellow_-complexioned, _copper_-color'd,
_white_-liver'd gentlemen, who never proved themselves _their_ friends.
don't you think your verses on a young ass too trivial a companion for
the religious musings? "scoundrel monarch," alter _that_; and the man of
ross is scarce admissible as it now stands curtailed of its fairer half:
reclaim its property from the chatterton, which it does but encumber, &
it will be a rich little poem. i hope you expunge great part of the old
notes in the new edition. that, in particular, most barefaced unfounded
impudent assertion, that mr. rogers is indebted for his story to loch
lomond, a poem by bruce! i have read the latter. i scarce think you
have. scarce anything is common to them both. the poor author of the
pleasures of memory was sorely hurt, dyer says, by the accusation of
unoriginality. he never saw the poem. i long to read your poem on burns;
i retain so indistinct a memory of it. in what shape and how does it
come into public? as you leave off writing poetry till you finish your
hymns, i suppose you print now all you have got by you. you have scarce
enough unprinted to make a 2d volume with lloyd. tell me all about it.
what is become of cowper? lloyd told me of some verses on his mother. if
you have them by you, pray send 'em me. i do so love him! never mind
their merit. may be _i_ may like 'em--as your taste and mine do not
always exactly _indentify_. yours,

lamb.

[coleridge intended to print in his new edition the lines that he had
contributed to southey's _joan of arc_, 1796, with certain additions,
under the title "the progress of liberty; or, the visions of the maid of
orleans." writing to cottle coleridge had said: "i much wish to send _my
visions of the maid of arc_ and my corrections to wordsworth ... and to
lamb, whose taste and _judgment_ i see reason to think more correct and
philosophical than my own, which yet i place pretty high." lamb's
criticisms are contained in this letter. coleridge abandoned his idea of
including the poem in the 1797 edition, and the lines were not
separately published until 1817, in _sibylline leaves_, under the title
"the destiny of nations."

"montauban ... roubigne." an illustration from henry mackenzie's novel
_julia de roubigne_, 1777, from which lamb took hints, a little later,
for the structure of part of his story _rosamund gray_.

this is the passage in "religious musings" that lamb particularly
praises:--

there is one mind, one omnipresent mind,
omnific. his most holy name is love.
truth of subliming import! with the which
who feeds and saturates his constant soul,
he from his small particular orbit flies
with blest outstarting! from himself he flies,
stands in the sun, and with no partial gaze
views all creation; and he loves it all,
and blesses it, and calls it very good!
this is indeed to dwell with the most high!
cherubs and rapture-trembling seraphim
can press no nearer to the almighty's throne.

southey's new volume, which coleridge had noticed, was his _poems_,
second edition, vol. i., 1797. the poem in question was "on my own
miniature picture taken at two years of age."

edward fairfax's "tasso" (_godfrey of bulloigne, or the recoverie of
jerusalem_) was published in 1600. john hoole, a later translator,
became principal auditor at the india house, and resigned in 1786. he
died in 1803.

coleridge's dream was the poem called "the raven."

citizen john thelwall (1764-1834), to whom many of coleridge's early
letters are written, was a jacobin enthusiast who had gone to the tower
with thomas hardy and home tooke in 1794, but was acquitted at his
trial. at this time he was writing and lecturing on political subjects.
when, in 1818, thelwall acquired _the champion_ lamb wrote squibs for it
against the regent and others.

colson was perhaps thomas coulson, a friend of sir humphry davy and the
father of walter coulson (born? 1794) who was called "the walking
encyclopaedia," and was afterwards a friend of hazlitt.

"to discipline your young noviciate soul." a line from "religious
musings," 1796:--

i discipline my young noviciate thought.

"my poor old aunt." lamb's lines on his aunt hetty repeat some of this
praise; as also does the _elia_ essay on "christ's hospital."

john woolman (1720-1772), an american quaker. his _works_ comprise _a
journal of the life, gospel, labours, and christian experiences of that
faithful minister of jesus christ, john woolman_, and _his last epistle
and other writings_. lamb often praised the book.

"a london letter, 9-1/2." a word on the postal system of those days may
not be out of place. the cost of the letter when a frank had not been
procured was borne by the recipient. the rate varied with the distance.
the charge from london to bridgewater in 1797 was sevenpence. later it
was raised to ninepence and tenpence. no regular post was set up between
bridgewater and nether stowey until 1808, when the cost of the carriage
of a letter for the intervening nine miles was twopence.

"flocci." see note on page ii.

"the young ass," early versions, ended thus:--

soothe to rest
the tumult of some scoundrel monarch's breast.

coleridge changed the last line to--

the aching of pale fashion's vacant breast.

coleridge had asserted, in a 1796 note, that rogers had taken the story
of florio in the _pleasures of memory_ from michael bruce's _loch leven_
(not _loch lomond_). in the 1797 edition another note made apology for
the mistake.

cowper's "lines on the receipt of my mother's picture out of norfolk"
had been written in the spring of 1790. it is interesting to find lamb
reading them just now, for his own _blank verse_ poems, shortly to be
written, have much in common with cowper's verses, not only in manner
but in matter.]




letter 23


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

feb. 13th, 1797.

your poem is altogether admirable--parts of it are even exquisite--in
particular your personal account of the maid far surpasses any thing of
the sort in southey. i perceived all its excellences, on a first
reading, as readily as now you have been removing a supposed film from
my eyes. i was only struck with [a] certain faulty disproportion in the
matter and the _style_, which i still think i perceive, between these
lines and the former ones. i had an end in view; i wished to make you
reject the poem, only as being discordant with the other; and, in
subservience to that end, it was politically done in me to over-pass,
and make no mention of merit which, could you think me capable of
_overlooking_, might reasonably damn for ever in your judgment all
pretensions in me to be critical. there, i will be judged by lloyd,
whether i have not made a very handsome recantation. i was in the case
of a man whose friend has asked him his opinion of a certain young lady;
the deluded wight gives judgment against her _in toto_--don't like her
face, her walk, her manners--finds fault with her eyebrows--can see no
wit in her. his friend looks blank; he begins to smell a rat; wind veers
about; he acknowledges her good sense, her judgment in dress, a certain
simplicity of manners and honesty of heart, something too in her manners
which gains upon you after a short acquaintance,--and then her accurate
pronunciation of the french language and a pretty uncultivated taste in
drawing. the reconciled gentleman smiles applause, squeezes him by the
hand, and hopes he will do him the honour of taking a bit of dinner with
mrs.--and him--a plain family dinner--some day next week. "for, i
suppose, you never heard we were married! i'm glad to see you like my
wife, however; you'll come and see her, ha?" now am i too proud to
retract entirely. yet i do perceive i am in some sort straitened; you
are manifestly wedded to this poem, and what fancy has joined let no man
separate. i turn me to the joan of arc, second book.

the solemn openings of it are with sounds which, lloyd would say, "are
silence to the mind." the deep preluding strains are fitted to initiate
the mind, with a pleasing awe, into the sublimest mysteries of theory
concerning man's nature and his noblest destination--the philosophy of a
first cause--of subordinate agents in creation superior to man--the
subserviency of pagan worship and pagan faith to the introduction of a
purer and more perfect religion, which you so elegantly describe as
winning with gradual steps her difficult way northward from bethabra.
after all this cometh joan, a _publican's_ daughter, sitting on an
ale-house _bench_, and marking the _swingings_ of the _signboard_,
finding a poor man, his wife and six children, starved to death with
cold, and thence roused into a state of mind proper to receive visions
emblematical of equality; which what the devil joan had to do with, i
don't know, or indeed with the french and american revolutions; though
that needs no pardon, it is executed so nobly. after all, if you
perceive no disproportion, all argument is vain: i do not so much object
to parts. again, when you talk of building your fame on these lines in
preference to the "religious musings," i cannot help conceiving of you
and of the author of that as two different persons, and i think you a
very vain man.

i have been re-reading your letter. much of it i _could_ dispute; but
with the latter part of it, in which you compare the two joans with
respect to their predispositions for fanaticism, i _toto corde_
coincide; only i think that southey's strength rather lies in the
description of the emotions of the maid under the weight of
inspiration,--these (i see no mighty difference between _her_ describing
them or _you_ describing them), these if you only equal, the previous
admirers of his poem, as is natural, will prefer his; if you surpass,
prejudice will scarcely allow it, and i scarce think you will surpass,
though your specimen at the conclusion (i am in earnest) i think very
nigh equals them. and in an account of a fanatic or of a prophet the
description of her _emotions_ is expected to be most highly finished. by
the way, i spoke far too disparagingly of your lines, and, i am ashamed
to say, purposely. i should like you to specify or particularise; the
story of the "tottering eld," of "his eventful years all come and gone,"
is too general; why not make him a soldier, or some character, however,
in which he has been witness to frequency of "cruel wrong and strange
distress!" i think i should. when i laughed at the "miserable man
crawling from beneath the coverture," i wonder i [? you] did not
perceive it was a laugh of horror--such as i have laughed at dante's
picture of the famished ugolino. without falsehood, i perceive an
hundred beauties in your narrative. yet i wonder you do not perceive
something out-of-the way, something unsimple and artificial, in the
expression, "voiced a sad tale." i hate made-dishes at the muses'
banquet. i believe i was wrong in most of my other objections. but
surely "hailed him immortal," adds nothing to the terror of the man's
death, which it was your business to heighten, not diminish by a phrase
which takes away all terror from it. i like that line, "they closed
their eyes in sleep, nor knew 'twas death." indeed, there is scarce a
line i do not like. "_turbid_ ecstacy," is surely not so good as what
you _had_ written, "troublous." turbid rather suits the muddy kind of
inspiration which london porter confers. the versification is,
throughout, to my ears unexceptionable, with no disparagement to the
measure of the "religious musings," which is exactly fitted to the
thoughts.

you were building your house on a rock, when you rested your fame on
that poem. i can scarce bring myself to believe, that i am admitted to a
familiar correspondence, and all the licence of friendship, with a man
who writes blank verse like milton. now, this is delicate flattery,
_indirect_ flattery. go on with your "maid of orleans," and be content
to be second to yourself. i shall become a convert to it, when 'tis
finished.

this afternoon i attend the funeral of my poor old aunt, who died on
thursday. i own i am thankful that the good creature has ended all her
days of suffering and infirmity. she was to me the "cherisher of
infancy," and one must fall on these occasions into reflections which it
would be commonplace to enumerate, concerning death, "of chance and
change, and fate in human life." good god, who could have foreseen all
this but four months back! i had reckoned, in particular, on my aunt's
living many years; she was a very hearty old woman. but she was a mere
skeleton before she died, looked more like a corpse that had lain weeks
in the grave, than one fresh dead. "truly the light is sweet, and a
pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun; but let a man live
many days and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the days of
darkness, for they shall be many." coleridge, why are we to live on
after all the strength and beauty of existence are gone, when all the
life of life is fled, as poor burns expresses it? tell lloyd i have had
thoughts of turning quaker, and have been reading, or am rather just
beginning to read, a most capital book, good thoughts in good language,
william penn's "no cross, no crown;" i like it immensely. unluckily i
went to one of his meetings, tell him, in st. john street, yesterday,
and saw a man under all the agitations and workings of a fanatic, who
believed himself under the influence of some "inevitable presence." this
cured me of quakerism; i love it in the books of penn and woolman, but i
detest the vanity of a man thinking he speaks by the spirit, when what
he says an ordinary man might say without all that quaking and
trembling. in the midst of his inspiration--and the effects of it were
most noisy--was handed into the midst of the meeting a most terrible
blackguard wapping sailor; the poor man, i believe, had rather have been
in the hottest part of an engagement, for the congregation of
broad-brims, together with the ravings of the prophet, were too much for
his gravity, though i saw even he had delicacy enough not to laugh out.
and the inspired gentleman, though his manner was so supernatural, yet
neither talked nor professed to talk anything more than good sober
sense, common morality, with now and then a declaration of not speaking
from himself. among other things, looking back to his childhood and
early youth, he told the meeting what a graceless young dog he had been,
that in his youth he had a good share of wit: reader, if thou hadst seen
the gentleman, thou wouldst have sworn that it must indeed have been
many years ago, for his rueful physiognomy would have scared away the
playful goddess from the meeting, where he presided, for ever. a wit! a
wit! what could he mean? lloyd, it minded me of falkland in the
"rivals," "am i full of wit and humour? no, indeed you are not. am i the
life and soul of every company i come into? no, it cannot be said you
are." that hard-faced gentleman, a wit! why, nature wrote on his fanatic
forehead fifty years ago, "wit never comes, that comes to all." i should
be as scandalised at a _bon mot_ issuing from his oracle-looking mouth,
as to see cato go down a country-dance. god love you all. you are very
good to submit to be pleased with reading my nothings. 'tis the
privilege of friendship to talk nonsense, and to have her nonsense
re-spected.--yours ever,

c. lamb.

[lamb's aunt hetty, sarah lamb, was buried at st. james's, clerkenwell,
on february 13, 1797.

"as poor burns expresses it." in the "lament for james, earl of
glencairn," the stanza:--

in weary being now i pine,
for a' the life of life is dead,
and hope has left my aged ken,
on forward wing for ever fled.

"turning quaker." lamb refers to the peel meeting-house in john street,
clerkenwell. lamb afterwards used the story of the wit in the _ella_
essay "a quaker's meeting." in his invocation to the reader he here
foreshadows his elian manner.

"falkland" is in sheridan's comedy "the rivals" (see act ii., scene i).]




letter 24


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

april 7th, 1797.

your last letter was dated the 10th february; in it you promised to
write again the next day. at least, i did not expect so long, so
unfriend-like, a silence. there was a time, col., when a remissness of
this sort in a dear friend would have lain very heavy on my mind, but
latterly i have been too familiar with neglect to feel much from the
semblance of it. yet, to suspect one's self overlooked and in the way to
oblivion, is a feeling rather humbling; perhaps, as tending to
self-mortification, not unfavourable to the spiritual state. still, as
you meant to confer no benefit on the soul of your friend, you do not
stand quite clear from the imputation of unkindliness (a word by which i
mean the diminutive of unkindness). lloyd tells me he has been very ill,
and was on the point of leaving you. i addressed a letter to him at
birmingham: perhaps he got it not, and is still with you, i hope his
ill-health has not prevented his attending to a request i made in it,
that he would write again very soon to let me know how he was. i hope to
god poor lloyd is not very bad, or in a very bad way. pray satisfy me
about these things. and then david hartley was unwell; and how is the
small philosopher, the minute philosopher? and david's mother?
coleridge, i am not trifling, nor are these matter-of-fact [?course]
questions only. you are all very dear and precious to me; do what you
will, col., you may hurt me and vex me by your silence, but you cannot
estrange my heart from you all. i cannot scatter friendship[s] like
chuck-farthings, nor let them drop from mine hand like hour-glass sand.
i have two or three people in the world to whom i am more than
indifferent, and i can't afford to whistle them off to the winds. by the
way, lloyd may have told you about my sister. i told him. if not, i have
taken her out of her confinement, and taken a room for her at hackney,
and spend my sundays, holidays, etc., with her. she boards herself. in
one little half year's illness, and in such an illness of such a nature
and of such consequences! to get her out into the world again, with a
prospect of her never being so ill again--this is to be ranked not among
the common blessings of providence. may that merciful god make tender my
heart, and make me as thankful, as in my distress i was earnest, in my
prayers. congratulate me on an ever-present and never-alienable friend
like her. and do, do insert, if you have not _lost_, my dedication. it
will have lost half its value by coming so late. if you really are going
on with that volume, i shall be enabled in a day or two to send you a
short poem to insert. now, do answer this. friendship, and acts of
friendship, should be reciprocal, and free as the air; a friend should
never be reduced to beg an alms of his fellow. yet i will beg an alms; i
entreat you to write, and tell me all about poor lloyd, and all of you.
god love and preserve you all.

c. lamb.

[lloyd's domestication with coleridge had been intermittent. it began in
september, 1796; in november lloyd was very ill; in december coleridge
told mr. lloyd that he would retain his son no longer as pupil but
merely as a lodger and friend; at christmas charles lloyd was at
birmingham; in january he was in london; in march he was ill again and
his experiment with coleridge ended.

"the minute philosopher." a joking reference to bishop berkeley's
_alciphron; or, the minute philosopher_.

for the dedication to which lamb refers see above.]




letter 25


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

april 15th, 1797.

a vision of repentance

i saw a famous fountain in my dream,
where shady pathways to a valley led;
a weeping willow lay upon that stream,
and all around the fountain brink were spread
wide branching trees, with dark green leaf rich clad,
forming a doubtful twilight desolate and sad.

the place was such, that whoso enter'd in
disrobed was of every earthly thought,
and straight became as one that knew not sin,
or to the world's first innocence was brought;
enseem'd it now, he stood on holy ground,
in sweet and tender melancholy wrapt around.

a most strange calm stole o'er my soothed sprite;
long time i stood, and longer had i staid,
when lo! i saw, saw by the sweet moonlight,
which came in silence o'er that silent shade,
where near the fountain something like despair
made of that weeping willow garlands for her hair.

and eke with painful fingers she inwove
many an uncouth stem of savage thorn--
"the willow garland, _that_ was for her love,
and _these_ her bleeding temples would adorn."
with sighs her heart nigh burst--salt tears fast fell,
as mournfully she bended o'er that sacred well.

to whom when i addrest myself to speak,
she lifted up her eyes, and nothing said;
the delicate red came mantling o'er her cheek,
and gathering up her loose attire, she fled
to the dark covert of that woody shade
and in her goings seem'd a timid gentle maid.

revolving in my mind what this should mean,
and why that lovely lady plained so;
perplex'd in thought at that mysterious scene,
and doubting if 'twere best to stay or go,
i cast mine eyes in wistful gaze around,
when from the shades came slow a small and plaintive sound

"psyche am i, who love to dwell
in these brown shades, this woody dell,
where never busy mortal came,
till now, to pry upon my shame.

"at thy feet what thou dost see
the waters of repentance be,
which, night and day, i must augment
with tears, like a true penitent,
if haply so my day of grace
be not yet past; and this lone place,
o'er-shadowy, dark, excludeth hence
all thoughts but grief and penitence."

"_why dost thou weep, thou gentle maid!
and wherefore in this barren shade
thy hidden thoughts with sorrow feed?
can thing so fair repentance need?_"

"oh! i have done a deed of shame,
and tainted is my virgin fame,
and stain'd the beauteous maiden white
in which my bridal robes were dight."

"_and who the promis'd spouse declare,
and what those bridal garments were_?"

"severe and saintly righteousness
compos'd the clear white bridal dress;
jesus, the son of heaven's high king
bought with his blood the marriage ring.

"a wretched sinful creature, i
deem'd lightly of that sacred tye,
gave to a treacherous world my heart,
and play'd the foolish wanton's part.

"soon to these murky shades i came
to hide from the sun's light my shame--
and still i haunt this woody dell,
and bathe me in that healing well,
whose waters clear have influence
from sin's foul stains the soul to cleanse;
and night and day i them augment
with tears, like a true penitent,
until, due expiation made,
and fit atonement fully paid,
the lord and bridegroom me present
where in sweet strains of high consent,
god's throne before, the seraphim
shall chaunt the extatic marriage hymn."

"_now christ restore thee soon_"--i said,
and thenceforth all my dream was fled.

the above you will please to print immediately before the blank verse
fragments. tell me if you like it. i fear the latter half is unequal to
the former, in parts of which i think you will discover a delicacy of
pencilling not quite un-spenser-like. the latter half aims at the
_measure_, but has failed to attain the _poetry_, of milton in his
"comus" and fletcher in that exquisite thing ycleped the "faithful
shepherdess," where they both use eight-syllable lines. but this latter
half was finished in great haste, and as a task, not from that impulse
which affects the name of inspiration.

by the way, i have lit upon fairfax's "godfrey of bullen" for
half-a-crown. rejoice with me.

poor dear lloyd! i had a letter from him yesterday; his state of mind is
truly alarming. he has, by his own confession, kept a letter of mine
unopened three weeks, afraid, he says, to open it, lest i should speak
upbraidingly to him; and yet this very letter of mine was in answer to
one, wherein he informed me that an alarming illness had alone prevented
him from writing. you will pray with me, i know, for his recovery; for
surely, coleridge, an exquisiteness of feeling like this must border on
derangement. but i love him more and more, and will not give up the hope
of his speedy recovery, as he tells me he is under dr. darwin's regimen.

god bless us all, and shield us from insanity, which is "the sorest
malady of all."

my kind love to your wife and child.

c. lamb.

pray write, now.

[i have placed the poem at the head from the text of coleridge's
_poems_, 1797; but the version of the letter very likely differed (see
next letter for at least one alteration).

fairfax's _godfrey of bullen_ was his translation of tasso, which is
mentioned above.

lloyd, who was undergoing one of those attacks of acute melancholia to
which he was subject all his life, had been sent to lichfield where
erasmus darwin had established a sanatorium.

"the sorest malady of all." from lamb's lines to cowper.]




letter 26


charles lamb to s.t. coleridge

[tuesday,] june 13th, 1797.

i stared with wild wonderment to see thy well-known hand again. it
revived many a pleasing recollection of an epistolary intercourse, of
late strangely suspended, once the pride of my life. before i even
opened thy letter, i figured to myself a sort of complacency which my
little hoard at home would feel at receiving the new-comer into the
little drawer where i keep my treasures of this kind. you have done well
in writing to me. the little room (was it not a little one?) at the
salutation was already in the way of becoming a fading idea! it had
begun to be classed in my memory with those "wanderings with a fair
hair'd maid," in the recollection of which i feel i have no property.
you press me, very kindly do you press me, to come to stowey; obstacles,
strong as death, prevent me at present; maybe i shall be able to come
before the year is out; believe me, i will come as soon as i can, but i
dread naming a probable time. it depends on fifty things, besides the
expense, which is not nothing. lloyd wants me to come and see him; but,
besides that you have a prior claim on me, i should not feel myself so
much at home with him, till he gets a house of his own. as to
richardson, caprice may grant what caprice only refused, and it is no
more hardship, rightly considered, to be dependent on him for pleasure,
than to lie at the mercy of the rain and sunshine for the enjoyment of a
holiday: in either case we are not to look for a suspension of the laws
of nature. "grill will be grill." vide spenser.

i could not but smile at the compromise you make with me for printing
lloyd's poems first; but there is [are] in nature, i fear, too many
tendencies to envy and jealousy not to justify you in your apology. yet,
if any one is welcome to pre-eminence from me, it is lloyd, for he would
be the last to desire it. so pray, let his name _uniformly_ precede
mine, for it would be treating me like a child to suppose it could give
me pain. yet, alas! i am not insusceptible of the bad passions. thank
god, i have the ingenuousness to be ashamed of them. i am dearly fond of
charles lloyd; he is all goodness, and i have too much of the world in
my composition to feel myself thoroughly deserving of his friendship.

lloyd tells me that sheridan put you upon writing your tragedy. i hope
you are only coleridgeizing when you talk of finishing it in a few days.
shakspeare was a more modest man; but you best know your own power.

of my last poem you speak slightingly; surely the longer stanzas were
pretty tolerable; at least there was one good line in it,

"thick-shaded trees, with dark green leaf rich clad."

to adopt your own expression, i call this a "rich" line, a fine full
line. and some others i thought even beautiful. believe me, my little
gentleman will feel some repugnance at riding behind in the basket;
though, i confess, in pretty good company. your picture of idiocy, with
the sugar-loaf head, is exquisite; but are you not too severe upon our
more favoured brethren in fatuity? lloyd tells me how ill your wife and
child have been. i rejoice that they are better. my kindest remembrances
and those of my sister. i send you a trifling letter; but you have only
to think that i have been skimming the superficies of my mind, and found
it only froth. now, do write again; you cannot believe how i long and
love always to hear about you. yours, most affectionately,

charles lamb.

monday night.

["little drawer where i keep ..." lamb soon lost the habit of keeping
any letters, except manning's.

"wanderings with a fair-hair'd maid." lamb's own line. see sonnet quoted
above.

lamb's visit to stowey was made in july, as we shall see.

"grill will be grill." see the _faerie queene_, book ii., canto 12,
stanzas 86 and 87. "let gryll be gryll" is the right text.

lloyd had joined the poetical partnership, and his poems were to precede
lamb's in the 1797 volume. "lloyd's connections," coleridge had written
to cottle, "will take off a great many [copies], more than a hundred."

coleridge's tragedy was "osorio," of which we hear first in march, 1797,
when coleridge tells cottle that sheridan has asked him to write a play
for drury lane. it was finished in october, and rejected. in 1813, much
altered, it was performed under its new title, "remorse," and published
in book form. lamb wrote the prologue.

the "last poem" of which lamb speaks was "the vision of repentance." the
good line was altered to--

"wide branching trees, with dark green leaf rich clad,"

when the poem appeared in the appendix ("the basket," as lamb calls it)
of the 1797 volume.

"your picture of idiocy." compare s. t. coleridge to thomas poole, dated
"greta hall, oct. 5, 1801" (_thomas poole and his friends_): "we passed
a poor ideot boy, who exactly answered my description; he

"'stood in the sun, rocking his sugar-loaf head,
and staring at a bough from morn to sunset,
see-sawed his voice in inarticulate noises.'"

see this passage, much altered, in "remorse," ii., i, 186-191. the lines
do not occur in "osorio," yet they, or something like them, must have
been copied out by coleridge for lamb in june, 1797.]




letter 27


(_possibly only a fragment_)

charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[saturday,] june 24th, 1797.

did you seize the grand opportunity of seeing kosciusko while he was at
bristol? i never saw a hero; i wonder how they look. i have been reading
a most curious romance-like work, called the "life of john buncle, esq."
'tis very interesting, and an extraordinary compound of all manner of
subjects, from the depth of the ludicrous to the heights of sublime
religious truth. there is much abstruse science in it above my cut and
an infinite fund of pleasantry. john buncle is a famous fine man, formed
in nature's most eccentric hour. i am ashamed of what i write. but i
have no topic to talk of. i see nobody, and sit, and read or walk,
alone, and hear nothing. i am quite lost to conversation from disuse;
and out of the sphere of my little family, who, i am thankful, are
dearer and dearer to me every day, i see no face that brightens up at my
approach. my friends are at a distance; worldly hopes are at a low ebb
with me, and unworldly thoughts are not yet familiarised to me, though i
occasionally indulge in them. still i feel a calm not unlike content. i
fear it is sometimes more akin to physical stupidity than to a
heaven-flowing serenity and peace. what right have i to obtrude all this
upon you? what is such a letter to you? and if i come to stowey, what
conversation can i furnish to compensate my friend for those stores of
knowledge and of fancy, those delightful treasures of wisdom, which i
know he will open to me? but it is better to give than to receive; and i
was a very patient hearer and docile scholar in our winter evening
meetings at mr. may's; was i not, col.? what i have owed to thee, my
heart can ne'er forget.

god love you and yours. c. l.

saturday.

[thaddeus kosciusko (1746-1817), the polish patriot, to whom coleridge
had a sonnet in his _poems_, 1796, visited england and america after
being liberated from prison on the accession of paul i., and settled in
france in 1798.

_the life of john buncle, esq._, a book which lamb (and also hazlitt)
frequently praised, is a curious digressive novel, part religious, part
roystering, and wholly eccentric and individual, by thomas amory,
published, vol. i., in 1756, and vol. ii., in 1766.

"mr. may's." see note to the first letter.]




letter 28


(_possibly only a fragment_)

charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[no date. ? june 29, 1797.]

i discern a possibility of my paying you a visit next week. may i, can
i, shall i, come so soon? have you _room_ for me, _leisure_ for me, and
are you all pretty well? tell me all this honestly--immediately. and by
what _day_--coach could i come soonest and nearest to stowey? a few
months hence may suit you better; certainly me as well. if so, say so. i
long, i yearn, with all the longings of a child do i desire to see you,
to come among you--to see the young philosopher, to thank sara for her
last year's invitation in person--to read your tragedy--to read over
together our little book--to breathe fresh air--to revive in me vivid
images of "salutation scenery." there is a sort of sacrilege in my
letting such ideas slip out of my mind and memory. still that knave
richardson remaineth--a thorn in the side of hope, when she would lean
towards stowey. here i will leave off, for i dislike to fill up this
paper, which involves a question so connected with my heart and soul,
with meaner matter or subjects to me less interesting. i can talk, as i
can think, nothing else.

c. lamb.

thursday.

["our little book." coleridge's _poems_, second edition.

"salutation scenery." see note to the first letter.

"richardson." see note on page 34.]




letter 29


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[no date. probably july 19 or 26, 1797.]

i am scarcely yet so reconciled to the loss of you, or so subsided into
my wonted uniformity of feeling, as to sit calmly down to think of you
and write to you. but i reason myself into the belief that those few and
pleasant holidays shall not have been spent in vain. i feel improvement
in the recollection of many a casual conversation. the names of tom
poole, of wordsworth and his good sister, with thine and sara's, are
become "familiar in my mouth as household words." you would make me very
happy, if you think w. has no objection, by transcribing for me that
inscription of his. i have some scattered sentences ever floating on my
memory, teasing me that i cannot remember more of it. you may believe i
will make no improper use of it. believe me i can think now of many
subjects on which i had planned gaining information from you; but i
forgot my "treasure's worth" while i possessed it. your leg is now
become to me a matter of much more importance--and many a little thing,
which when i was present with you seemed scarce to _indent_ my notice,
now presses painfully on my remembrance. is the patriot come yet? are
wordsworth and his sister gone yet? i was looking out for john thelwall
all the way from bridgewater, and had i met him, i think it would have
moved almost me to tears. you will oblige me too by sending me my
great-coat, which i left behind in the oblivious state the mind is
thrown into at parting--is it not ridiculous that i sometimes envy that
great-coat lingering so cunningly behind?--at present i have none--so
send it me by a stowey waggon, if there be such a thing, directing for
c. l., no. 45, chapel-street, pentonville, near london. but above all,
_that inscription!_--it will recall to me the tones of all your
voices--and with them many a remembered kindness to one who could and
can repay you all only by the silence of a grateful heart. i could not
talk much, while i was with you, but my silence was not sullenness, nor
i hope from any bad motive; but, in truth, disuse has made me awkward at
it. i know i behaved myself, particularly at tom poole's, and at
cruikshank's, most like a sulky child; but company and converse are
strange to me. it was kind in you all to endure me as you did.

are you and your dear sara--to me also very dear, because very
kind--agreed yet about the management of little hartley? and how go on
the little rogue's teeth? i will see white to-morrow, and he shall send
you information on that matter; but as perhaps i can do it as well after
talking with him, i will keep this letter open.

my love and thanks to you and all of you.

c. l.

wednesday evening.

[lamb spent a week at nether stowey in july, 1797. coleridge tells
southey of this visit in a letter written in that month: "charles lamb
has been with me for a week. he left me friday morning. the second day
after wordsworth [who had just left racedown, near crewkerne, for
alfoxden, near stowey] came to me, dear sara accidentally emptied a
skillet of boiling milk on my foot, which confined me during the whole
time of c. lamb's stay and still prevents me from all walks longer than
a furlong." this is the cause of lamb's allusion to coleridge's leg, and
it also produced coleridge's poem beginning "this lime-tree bower my
prison," addressed to lamb, which opens as follows, the friends in the
fourth line being lamb, wordsworth and dorothy wordsworth. (wordsworth
was then twenty-seven. the _lyrical ballads_ were to be written in the
next few months.)

well, they are gone, and here must i remain,
lam'd by the scathe of fire, lonely and faint,
this lime-tree bower my prison! they, meantime
my friends, whom i may never meet again,
on springy heath, along the hill-top edge
wander delighted, and look down, perchance,
on that same rifted dell, where many an ash
twists its wild limbs beside the ferny rock
whose plumy ferns forever nod and drip,
spray'd by the waterfall. but chiefly thou
my gentle-hearted _charles!_ thou who had pin'd
and hunger'd after nature many a year,
in the great city pent, winning thy way
with sad yet bowed soul, through evil and pain
and strange calamity!

tom poole was thomas poole (1765-1837), a wealthy tanner, and
coleridge's friend, correspondent and patron, who lived at stowey.

the patriot and john thelwall were one. see note on page 93.

"that inscription," the "lines left upon a seat in a yew tree," written
in 1795. lamb refers to it again in 1815.

the address at pentonville is the first indication given by lamb that he
has left little queen street. we last saw him there for certain in
letter 17 on december 9. the removal had been made probably at the end
of 1796.

john cruikshank, a neighbour of coleridge, had married a miss bude on
the same day that coleridge married sara flicker.

of the business connected with white we know nothing.]




letter 30


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[p.m. august 24, 1797.]

poor charles lloyd came to me about a fortnight ago. he took the
opportunity of mr. hawkes coming to london, and i think at his request,
to come with him. it seemed to me, and he acknowledged it, that he had
come to gain a little time and a little peace, before he made up his
mind. he was a good deal perplexed what to do--wishing earnestly that he
had never entered into engagements which he felt himself unable to
fulfill, but which on sophia's account he could not bring himself to
relinquish. i could give him little advice or comfort, and feeling my
own inability painfully, eagerly snatched at a proposal he made me to go
to southey's with him for a day or two. he then meant to return with me,
who could stay only one night. while there, he at one time thought of
going to consult you, but changed his intention and stayed behind with
southey, and wrote an explicit letter to sophia. i came away on the
tuesday, and on the saturday following, _last saturday_, receiv'd a
letter dated bath, in which he said he was on his way to
birmingham,--that southey was accompanying him,--and that he went for
the purpose of persuading sophia to a scotch marriage--i greatly feared,
that she would never consent to this, from what lloyd had told me of her
character. but waited most anxiously the result. since then i have not
had one letter. for god's sake, if you get any intelligence of or from
chas lloyd, communicate it, for i am much alarmed.

c. lamb.

i wrote to burnett what i write now to you,--was it from him you heard,
or elsewhere?--

he said if he _had_ come to you, he could never have brought himself to
leave you. in all his distress he was sweetly and exemplarily calm and
master of himself,--and seemed perfectly free from his disorder.--

how do you all at?

[this letter is unimportant, except in showing lamb's power of sharing
his friends' troubles. charles lloyd was not married to sophia
pemberton, of birmingham, until 1799; nothing rash being done, as lamb
seems to think possible. the reference to southey, who was at this time
living at burton, in hampshire, throws some light on de quincey's
statement, in his "autobiography," that owing to the objection of miss
pemberton's parents to the match, lloyd secured the assistance of
southey to carry the lady off.

burnett was george burnett (1776?-1811), one of coleridge's fellow
pantisocratists, whom we shall meet later.

the "he" of the second postscript is not burnett, but lloyd.]




letter 31


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge
[about september 20, 1797.]

written a twelvemonth after the events

[_friday next, coleridge, is the day on which my mother died._]

alas! how am i changed! where be the tears,
the sobs and forced suspensions of the breath,
and all the dull desertions of the heart
with which i hung o'er my dear mother's corse?
where be the blest subsidings of the storm
within; the sweet resignedness of hope
drawn heavenward, and strength of filial love,
in which i bow'd me to my father's will?
my god and my redeemer, keep not thou
my heart in brute and sensual thanklessness
seal'd up, oblivious ever of that dear grace,
and health restor'd to my long-loved friend.

long loved, and worthy known! thou didst not keep
her soul in death. o keep not now, my lord,
thy servants in far worse--in spiritual death
and darkness--blacker than those feared shadows
o' the valley all must tread. lend us thy balms,
thou dear physician of the sin-sick soul,
and heal our cleansed bosoms of the wounds
with which the world hath pierc'd us thro' and thro'!
give us new flesh, new birth; elect of heaven
may we become, in thine election sure
contain'd, and to one purpose steadfast drawn--
our souls' salvation.

                thou and i, dear friend,
with filial recognition sweet, shall know
one day the face of our dear mother in heaven,
and her remember'd looks of love shall greet
with answering looks of love, her placid smiles
meet with a smile as placid, and her hand
with drops of fondness wet, nor fear repulse.

be witness for me, lord, i do not ask
those days of vanity to return again,
(nor fitting me to ask, nor thee to give),
vain loves, and "wanderings with a fair-hair'd maid;"
(child of the dust as i am), who so long
my foolish heart steep'd in idolatry,
and creature-loves. forgive it, o my maker!
if in a mood of grief, i sin almost
in sometimes brooding on the days long past,
(and from the grave of time wishing them back),
days of a mother's fondness to her child--
her little one! oh, where be now those sports
and infant play-games? where the joyous troops
of children, and the haunts i did so love?
0 my companions! o ye loved names
of friend, or playmate dear, gone are ye now.
gone divers ways; to honour and credit some:
and some, i fear, to ignominy and shame!
i only am left, with unavailing grief
one parent dead to mourn, and see one live
of all life's joys bereft, and desolate:
am left, with a few friends, and one above
the rest, found faithful in a length of years,
contented as i may, to bear me on,
t' the not unpeaceful evening of a day
made black by morning storms.

the following i wrote when i had returned from c. lloyd, leaving him
behind at burton with southey. to understand some of it, you must
remember that at that time he was very much perplexed in mind.

a stranger and alone, i past those scenes
we past so late together; and my heart
felt something like desertion, as i look'd
around me, and the pleasant voice of friend
was absent, and the cordial look was there
no more, to smile on me. i thought on lloyd--
all he had been to me! and now i go
again to mingle with a world impure;
with men who make a mock of holy things,
mistaken, and of man's best hope think scorn.
the world does much to warp the heart of man;
and i may sometimes join its idiot laugh:
of this i now complain not. deal with me,
omniscient father, as thou judgest best,
and in _thy_ season soften thou my heart.
i pray not for myself: i pray for him
whose soul is sore perplexed. shine thou on him,
father of lights! and in the difficult paths
make plain his way before him: his own thoughts
may he not think--his own ends not pursue--
so shall he best perform thy will on earth.
greatest and best, thy will be ever ours!

the former of these poems i wrote with unusual celerity t'other morning
at office. i expect you to like it better than anything of mine; lloyd
does, and i do myself.

you use lloyd very ill, never writing to him. i tell you again that his
is not a mind with which you should play tricks. he deserves more
tenderness from you.

for myself, i must spoil a little passage of beaumont and fletcher to
adapt it to my feelings:--

                              "i am prouder
that i was once your friend, tho' now forgot,
than to have had another true to me."

if you don't write to me now, as i told lloyd, i shall get angry, and
call you hard names--manchineel and i don't know what else. i wish you
would send me my great-coat. the snow and the rain season is at hand,
and i have but a wretched old coat, once my father's, to keep 'em off,
and that is transitory.

"when time drives flocks from field to fold,
when ways grow foul and blood gets cold,"

i shall remember where i left my coat. meet emblem wilt thou be, old
winter, of a friend's neglect--cold, cold, cold! remembrance where
remembrance is due.

c. lamb.

[the two poems included in this letter were printed in _blank verse_, a
volume which lamb and lloyd issued in 1798.

coleridge had written to lloyd, we know, as late as july, because he
sent him a version of the poem "this lime-tree bower, my prison;" but a
coolness that was to ripen into positive hostility had already begun. of
this we shall see more later.

the passage from beaumont and fletcher is in "the maid's tragedy" (act
ii., scene i), where aspatia says to amintor:--

thus i wind myself
into this willow garland, and am prouder
that i was once your love (though now refus'd)
than to have had another true to me.

the scene is in lamb's _dramatic specimens_.

the reference to manchineel is explained by a passage in coleridge's
dedication of his 1797 volume, then just published, to his brother, the
rev. george coleridge, where, speaking of the friends he had known, he
says:--

and some most false,
false and fair-foliag'd as the manchineel,
have tempted me to slumber in their shade

--the manchineel being a poisonous west indian tree.

between this and the next letter probably came correspondence that has
now been lost.]




letter 32


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

january 28th, 1798.

you have writ me many kind letters, and i have answered none of them. i
don't deserve your attentions. an unnatural indifference has been
creeping on me since my last misfortunes, or i should have seized the
first opening of a correspondence with _you_. to you i owe much under
god. in my brief acquaintance with you in london, your conversations won
me to the better cause, and rescued me from the polluting spirit of the
world. i might have been a worthless character without you; as it is, i
do possess a certain improvable portion of devotional feelings, tho'
when i view myself in the light of divine truth, and not according to
the common measures of human judgment, i am altogether corrupt and
sinful. this is no cant. i am very sincere.

these last afflictions, coleridge, have failed to soften and bend my
will. they found me unprepared. my former calamities produced in me a
spirit of humility and a spirit of prayer. i thought they had
sufficiently disciplined me; but the event ought to humble me. if god's
judgments now fail to take away from me the heart of stone, what more
grievous trials ought i not to expect? i have been very querulous,
impatient under the rod--full of little jealousies and heartburnings.--i
had well nigh quarrelled with charles lloyd; and for no other reason, i
believe, than that the good creature did all he could to make me happy.
the truth is, i thought he tried to force my mind from its natural and
proper bent; he continually wished me to be from home; he was drawing me
_from_ the consideration of my poor dear mary's situation, rather than
assisting me to gain a proper view of it with religious consolations. i
wanted to be left to the tendency of my own mind in a solitary state
which, in times past, i knew had led to quietness and a patient bearing
of the yoke. he was hurt that i was not more constantly with him; but he
was living with white, a man to whom i had never been accustomed to
impart my _dearest feelings_, tho' from long habits of friendliness, and
many a social and good quality, i loved him very much. i met company
there sometimes--indiscriminate company. any society almost, when i am
in affliction, is sorely painful to me. i seem to breathe more freely,
to think more collectedly, to feel more properly and calmly, when alone.
all these things the good creature did with the kindest intentions in
the world, but they produced in me nothing but soreness and discontent.
i became, as he complained, "jaundiced" towards him ... but he has
forgiven me--and his smile, i hope, will draw all such humours from me.
i am recovering, god be praised for it, a healthiness of mind, something
like calmness--but i want more religion--i am jealous of human helps and
leaning-places. i rejoice in your good fortunes. may god at the last
settle you!--you have had many and painful trials; humanly speaking they
are going to end; but we should rather pray that discipline may attend
us thro' the whole of our lives ... a careless and a dissolute spirit
has advanced upon _me_ with large strides--pray god that my present
afflictions may be sanctified to me! mary is recovering, but i see no
opening yet of a situation for her; your invitation went to my very
heart, but you have a power of exciting interest, of leading all hearts
captive, too forcible to admit of mary's being with you.

i consider her as perpetually on the brink of madness. i think you would
almost make her dance within an inch of the precipice: she must be with
duller fancies and cooler intellects. i know a young man of this
description, who has suited her these twenty years, and may live to do
so still, if we are one day restored to each other. in answer to your
suggestions of occupation for me, i must say that i do not think my
capacity altogether suited for disquisitions of that kind.... i have
read little, i have a very weak memory, and retain little of what i
read; am unused to composition in which any methodising is required; but
i thank you sincerely for the hint, and shall receive it as far as i am
able: that is, endeavour to engage my mind in some constant and innocent
pursuit. i know my capacities better than you do.

accept my kindest love, and believe me yours, as ever.

c. l.

[the first letter that has been preserved since september of the
previous year. in the meantime lamb had begun to work on _rosamund
gray_, probably upon an impulse gained from the visit to stowey, and was
also arranging to join lloyd, who was living in london with white, in
the volume of poems to be called _blank verse_. southey, writing many
years later to edward moxon, said of lloyd and white: "no two men could
be imagined more unlike each other; lloyd had no drollery in his nature;
white seemed to have nothing else. you will easily understand how lamb
could sympathise with both."

the new calamity to which lamb refers in this letter was probably a
relapse in mary lamb's condition. when he last mentioned her she was so
far better as to be able to be moved into lodgings at hackney: all that
good was now undone. coleridge seems to have suggested that she should
visit stowey.

it was about this time that lamb wrote the poem "the old familiar
faces," which i quote below in its original form, afterwards changed by
the omission of the first four lines:--

the old familiar faces

where are they gone, the old familiar faces?

i had a mother, but she died, and left me,
died prematurely in a day of horrors--
all, all are gone, the old familiar faces.

i have had playmates, i have had companions,
in my days of childhood, in my joyful school-days--
all, all are gone, the old familiar faces.

i have been laughing, i have been carousing,
drinking late, sitting late, with my bosom cronies--
all, all are gone, the old familiar faces.

i loved a love once, fairest among women.
closed are her doors on me, i must not see her--
all, all are gone, the old familiar faces.

i have a friend, a kinder friend has no man.
like an ingrate, i left my friend abruptly;
left him, to muse on the old familiar faces.

ghost-like, i paced round the haunts of my childhood.
earth seem'd a desert i was bound to traverse,
seeking to find the old familiar faces.

friend of my bosom, thou more than a brother!
why wert not thou born in my father's dwelling?
so might we talk of the old familiar faces.

for some they have died, and some they have left me,
_and some are taken from me_; all are departed;
all, all are gone, the old familiar faces.

january, 1798.

it is conjectured by mr. j. a. rutter, and there is much reason to
believe it a right theory, especially when taken into connection with
the present letter, that lloyd was the friend of the fifth stanza and
coleridge the friend of the seventh. the italicised half line might
refer to "anna," but, since she is mentioned in the fourth stanza, it
more probably, i think, refers to mary lamb, who, as we have seen, had
been so ill as to necessitate removal from hackney into more special
confinement again.

the letter was addressed to coleridge at the reverend a. rowe's,
shrewsbury. coleridge had been offered the unitarian pulpit at
shrewsbury and was on the point of accepting when he received news of
the annuity of l150 which josiah and thomas wedgwood had settled upon
him.

between this letter and the next certainly came other letters to
coleridge, now lost, one of which is referred to by coleridge in the
letter to lamb quoted below.]




letter 33


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge

[no date. early summer, 1798.]

theses quaedam theologicae

1. whether god loves a lying angel better than a true man?

2. whether the archangel uriel _could_ affirm an untruth? and if he
_could_ whether he _would_?

3. whether honesty be an angelic virtue? or not rather to be reckoned
among those qualities which the schoolmen term '_virtutes minus
splendidoe et terrae et hominis participes_'?

4. whether the higher order of seraphim illuminati ever sneer?

5. whether pure intelligences can love?

6. whether the seraphim ardentes do not manifest their virtues by the
way of vision and theory? and whether practice be not a sub-celestial
and merely human virtue?

7. whether the vision beatific be anything more or less than a perpetual
representment to each individual angel of his own present attainments
and future capabilities, somehow in the manner of mortal
looking-glasses, reflecting a perpetual complacency and
self-satisfaction?

8 and last. whether an immortal and amenable soul may not come to be
damned at last, and the man never suspect it beforehand?

_learned sir, my friend_,

presuming on our long habits of friendship and emboldened further by
your late liberal permission to avail myself of your correspondence, in
case i want any knowledge, (which i intend to do when i have no
encyclopaedia or lady's magazine at hand to refer to in any matter of
science,) i now submit to your enquiries the above theological
propositions, to be by you defended, or oppugned, or both, in the
schools of germany, whither i am told you are departing, to the utter
dissatisfaction of your native devonshire and regret of universal
england; but to my own individual consolation if thro' the channel of
your wished return, learned sir, my friend, may be transmitted to this
our island, from those famous theological wits of leipsic and gottingen,
any rays of illumination, in vain to be derived from the home growth of
our english halls and colleges. finally, wishing, learned sir, that you
may see schiller and swing in a wood (_vide_ poems) and sit upon a tun,
and eat fat hams of westphalia,

i remain,
your friend and docile pupil to instruct
charles lamb.
1798.

to s. t. coleridge.

[lamb's last letter to coleridge for two years. see note to the next
letter.

lamb's reading of thomas aquinas probably was at the base of his theses.
william godwin, in his "history of knowledge, learning and taste in
great britain," which had run through some years of the _new annual
register_, cited, in 1786, a number of the more grotesque queries of the
old schoolmen. mr. kegan paul suggested that lamb went to godwin for his
examination paper; but i should think this very unlikely. some of the
questions hit coleridge very hard.

this letter was first printed by joseph cottle in his _early
recollections_, 1837, with the remark: "mr. coleridge gave me this
letter, saying, 'these young visionaries will do each other no good.'"
it marks an epoch in lamb's life, since it brought about, or, at any
rate, clinched, the only quarrel that ever subsisted between coleridge
and himself.

the story is told in _charles lamb and the lloyds_. briefly, lloyd had
left coleridge in the spring of 1797; a little later, in a state of much
perplexity, he had carried his troubles to lamb, and to southey, between
whom and coleridge no very cordial feeling had existed for some time,
rather than to coleridge himself, his late mentor. that probably fanned
the flame. the next move came from coleridge. he printed in the _monthly
magazine_ for november, 1797, three sonnets signed nehemiah
higginbottom, burlesquing instances of "affectation of unaffectedness,"
and "puny pathos" in the poems of himself, of lamb, and of lloyd, the
humour of which lamb probably did not much appreciate, since he believed
in the feelings expressed in his verse, while lloyd was certainly
unfitted to esteem it. coleridge effected even more than he had
contemplated, for southey took the sonnet upon simplicity as an attack
upon himself, which did not, however, prevent him, a little later, from
a similar exercise in ponderous humour under the too similar name of
abel shufflebottom.

in march, 1798, when a new edition of coleridge's 1797 _poems_ was in
contemplation, lloyd wrote to cottle, the publisher, asking that he
would persuade coleridge to omit his (lloyd's) portion, a request which
coleridge probably resented, but which gave him the opportunity of
replying that no persuasion was needed for the omission of verses
published at the earnest request of the author.

meanwhile a worse offence than all against coleridge was perpetrated by
lloyd. in the spring of 1798 was published at bristol his novel, edmund
oliver, dedicated to lamb, in which coleridge's experiences in the army,
under the alias of silas tomkyn comberback, in 1793-1794, and certain of
coleridge's peculiarities, including his drug habit, were utilised.
added to this, lloyd seems to have repeated both to lamb and southey, in
distorted form, certain things which coleridge had said of them, either
in confidence, or, at any rate, with no wish that they should be
repeated; with the result that lamb actually went so far as to take
sides with lloyd against his older friend. the following extracts from a
letter from coleridge to lamb, which i am permitted by mr. ernest
hartley coleridge to print, carries the story a little farther:--

[spring of 1798.]

dear lamb,--lloyd has informed me through miss wordsworth that you
intend no longer to correspond with me. this has given me little pain;
not that i do not love and esteem you, but on the contrary because i am
confident that your intentions are pure. you are performing what you
deem a duty, and humanly speaking have that merit which can be derived
from the performance of a painful duty. painful, for you would not
without struggles abandon me in behalf of a man [lloyd] who, wholly
ignorant of all but your name, became attached to you in consequence of
my attachment, caught _his_ from _my_ enthusiasm, and learned to love
you at my fireside, when often while i have been sitting and talking of
your sorrows and afflictions i have stopped my conversations and lifted
up wet eyes and prayed for you. no! i am confident that although you do
not think as a wise man, you feel as a good man.

from you i have received little pain, because for you i suffer little
alarm. i cannot say this for your friend; it appears to me evident that
his feelings are vitiated, and that his ideas are in their combination
merely the creatures of those feelings. i have received letters from
him, and the best and kindest wish which, as a christian, i can offer in
return is that he may feel remorse....

when i wrote to you that my sonnet to simplicity was not composed with
reference to southey, you answered me (i believe these were the words):
"it was a lie too gross for the grossest ignorance to believe;" and i
was not angry with you, because the assertion which the grossest
ignorance would believe a lie the omniscient knew to be truth. this,
however, makes me cautious not too hastily to affirm the falsehood of an
assertion of lloyd's that in edmund oliver's love-fit, leaving college,
and going into the army he had no sort of allusion to or recollection of
my love-fit, leaving college, and going into the army, and that he never
thought of my person in the description of oliver's person in the first
letter of the second volume. this cannot appear stranger to me than my
assertion did to you, and therefore i will suspend my absolute faith....

i have been unfortunate in my connections. both you and lloyd became
acquainted with me when your minds were far from being in a composed or
natural state, and you clothed my image with a suit of notions and
feelings which could belong to nothing human. you are restored to
comparative saneness, and are merely wondering what is become of the
coleridge with whom you were so passionately in love; _charles lloyd's_
mind has only changed his disease, and he is now arraying his ci-devant
angel in a flaming san benito--the whole ground of the garment a dark
brimstone and plenty of little devils flourished out in black. oh, me!
lamb, "even in laughter the heart is sad!"...

god bless you
      s. t. coleridge.

one other passage. in a letter from lloyd at birmingham to cottle, dated
june, 1798, lloyd says, in response to cottle's suggestion that he
should visit coleridge, "i love coleridge, and can forget all that has
happened. at present i could not well go to stowey.... lamb quitted me
yesterday, after a fortnight's visit. i have been much interested in his
society. i never knew him so happy in my life. i shall write to
coleridge to-day." coleridge left for germany in september.

"schiller and swing in a wood." an allusion to coleridge's sonnet to
schiller:--

ah! bard tremendous in sublimity!
  could i behold thee in thy loftier mood
wand'ring at eve with finely-frenzied eye
  beneath some vast old tempest-swinging wood!

here should perhaps come lamb's first letter to robert lloyd, not
available for this edition, but printed by canon ainger, and in _charles
lamb and the lloyds_, where it is dated october. lamb's first letter is
one of advice, apparently in reply to some complaints of his position
addressed to him by lloyd. a second and longer letter which, though
belonging to august, 1798, may be mentioned here, also counsels,
commending the use of patience and humility. lamb is here seen in the
character of a spiritual adviser. the letter is unique in his
correspondence.

robert lloyd was a younger brother of charles lloyd, and lamb had
probably met him when on his visit to birmingham in the summer. the boy,
then not quite twenty, was apprenticed to a quaker draper at saffron
walden in essex.]




letter 34


charles lamb to robert southey

saturday, july 28th, 1798.

i am ashamed that i have not thanked you before this for the "joan of
arc," but i did not know your address, and it did not occur to me to
write through cottle. the poem delighted me, and the notes amused me,
but methinks she of neufchatel, in the print, holds her sword too "like
a dancer." i sent your _notice_ to phillips, particularly requesting an
immediate insertion, but i suppose it came too late. i am sometimes
curious to know what progress you make in that same "calendar:" whether
you insert the nine worthies and whittington? what you do or how you can
manage when two saints meet and quarrel for precedency? martlemas, and
candlemas, and christmas, are glorious themes for a writer like you,
antiquity-bitten, smit with the love of boars' heads and rosemary; but
how you can ennoble the 1st of april i know not. by the way i had a
thing to say, but a certain false modesty has hitherto prevented me:
perhaps i can best communicate my wish by a hint,--my birthday is on the
10th of february, new style; but if it interferes with any remarkable
event, why rather than my country should lose her fame, i care not if i
put my nativity back eleven days. fine family patronage for your
"calendar," if that old lady of prolific memory were living, who lies
(or lyes) in some church in london (saints forgive me, but i have forgot
_what_ church), attesting that enormous legend of as many children as
days in the year. i marvel her impudence did not grasp at a leap-year.
three hundred and sixty-five dedications, and all in a family--you might
spit in spirit on the oneness of maecenas' patronage!

samuel taylor coleridge, to the eternal regret of his native devonshire,
emigrates to westphalia--"poor lamb (these were his last words), if he
wants any _knowledge_, he may apply to me,"--in ordinary cases, i
thanked him, i have an "encyclopaedia" at hand, but on such an occasion
as going over to a german university, i could not refrain from sending
him the following propositions, to be by him defended or oppugned (or
both) at leipsic or gottingen.

theses quaedam theologicae

i

"whether god loves a lying angel better than a true man?"

ii

"whether the archangel uriel _could_ knowingly affirm an untruth, and
whether, if he _could_, he _would_?"

iii

"whether honesty be an angelic virtue, or not rather belonging to that
class of qualities which the schoolmen term 'virtutes minus splendidae et
hominis et terrae nimis participes?'"

iv

"whether the seraphim ardentes do not manifest their goodness by the way
of vision and theory? and whether practice be not a sub-celestial, and
merely human virtue?"

v

"whether the higher order of seraphim illuminati ever _sneer_?"

vi

"whether pure intelligences can _love_, or whether they love anything
besides pure intellect?"

vii

"whether the beatific vision be anything more or less than a perpetual
representment to each individual angel of his own present attainments,
and future capabilities, something in the manner of mortal
looking-glasses?"

viii

"whether an 'immortal and amenable soul' may not come _to be damned at
last, and the man never suspect it beforehand_?"

samuel taylor c. had not deigned an answer; was it impertinent of me to
avail myself of that offered source of knowledge? lloyd is returned to
town from ipswich where he has been with his brother. he has brought
home three acts of a play which i have not yet read. the scene for the
most part laid in a brothel. o tempora, o mores! but as friend coleridge
said when he was talking bawdy to miss ---- "to the pure all things are
pure."

wishing "madoc" may be born into the world with as splendid promise as
the second birth or purification of the maid of neufchatel,--i remain
yours sincerely,

c. lamb.

i hope edith is better; my kindest remembrances to her. you have a good
deal of trifling to forgive in this letter.

[this is lamb's first letter to southey that has been preserved.
probably others came before it. southey now becomes lamb's chief
correspondent for some months. in canon ainger's transcript the letter
ends with "love and remembrances to cottle."

southey's _joan of arc_, second edition, had been published by cottle in
1798. it has no frontispiece: the print of joan of arc must have come
separately.

phillips was sir richard phillips (1767-1840), editor of the _monthly
magazine_ and the publisher satirised in sorrow's _lavengro_.

the calendar ultimately became the _annual anthology_. southey had at
first an idea of making it a poetical calendar or almanac.

"that old lady of prolific memory." lamb is thinking, i imagine, of the
story in howell's _familiar letters_ (also in evelyn's _diary_) of the
"wonder of nature" near the hague. "that wonder of nature is a
church-monument, where an earl and a lady are engraven with 365 children
about them, which were all deliver'd at one birth." the story tells that
a beggar woman with twins asked alms of the countess, who denying that
it was possible for two children to be born at once and vilifying the
beggar, that woman cursed her and called upon god to show his judgment
upon her by causing her to bear "at one birth as many children as there
are days in the year, which she did before the same year's end, having
never born child before." howell seems to have been convinced of the
authenticity of the story by the spectacle of the christening basin used
by the family. the beggar, who spoke on the third day of the year, meant
as many days as had been in that year--three.

edith was southey's wife.]




letter 35


charles lamb to robert southey

oct. 18th, 1798.

dear southey,--i have at last been so fortunate as to pick up wither's
emblems for you, that "old book and quaint," as the brief author of
"rosamund gray" hath it; it is in a most detestable state of
preservation, and the cuts are of a fainter impression than i have seen.
some child, the curse of antiquaries and bane of bibliopolical rarities,
hath been dabbling in some of them with its paint and dirty fingers, and
in particular hath a little sullied the author's own portraiture, which
i think valuable, as the poem that accompanies it is no common one; this
last excepted, the emblems are far inferior to old quarles. i once told
you otherwise, but i had not then read old q. with attention. i have
picked up, too, another copy of quarles for ninepence!!! o tempora! o
lectores!--so that if you have lost or parted with your own copy, say
so, and i can furnish you, for you prize these things more than i do.
you will be amused, i think, with honest wither's "supersedeas to all
them whose custom it is, without any deserving, to importune authors to
give unto them their books." i am sorry 'tis imperfect, as the lottery
board annexed to it also is. methinks you might modernise and elegantise
this supersedeas, and place it in front of your "joan of arc," as a
gentle hint to messrs. park, &c. one of the happiest emblems and
comicalest cuts is the owl and little chirpers, page 63.

wishing you all amusement, which your true emblem-fancier can scarce
fail to find in even bad emblems, i remain your caterer to command,

c. lamb.

love and respects to edith. i hope she is well. how does your calendar
prosper?

[this letter contains lamb's first reference to _rosamund gray_, his
only novel, which had been published a little earlier in the year.
"wither's _emblems_, an 'old book and quaint,'" was one of the few
volumes belonging to old margaret, rosamund's grandmother (chapter i).
see next letter and note.

wither's _emblems_ was published in 1635; quarles' in the same year. i
give wither's "supersedeas" in the appendix to my large edition, vol.
vii., together with a reproduction of the owl and little chirpers from
the edition of 1635.]




letter 36


charles lamb to robert southey

[october 29, 1798.]

dear southey,--i thank you heartily for the eclogue; it pleases me
mightily, being so full of picture-work and circumstances. i find no
fault in it, unless perhaps that joanna's ruin is a catastrophe too
trite: and this is not the first or second time you have clothed your
indignation, in verse, in a tale of ruined innocence. the old lady,
spinning in the sun, i hope would not disdain to claim some kindred with
old margaret. i could almost wish you to vary some circumstances in the
conclusion. a gentleman seducer has so often been described in prose and
verse; what if you had accomplished joanna's ruin by the clumsy arts and
rustic gifts of some country-fellow? i am thinking, i believe, of the
song,

"an old woman clothed in grey,
  whose daughter was charming and young,
and she was deluded away
  by roger's false nattering tongue."

a roger-lothario would be a novel character: i think you might paint him
very well. you may think this a very silly suggestion, and so, indeed,
it is; but, in good truth, nothing else but the first words of that
foolish ballad put me upon scribbling my "rosamund." but i thank you
heartily for the poem. not having anything of my own to send you in
return--though, to tell truth, i am at work upon something, which if i
were to cut away and garble, perhaps i might send you an extract or two
that might not displease you; but i will not do that; and whether it
will come to anything, i know not, for i am as slow as a fleming painter
when i compose anything. i will crave leave to put down a few lines of
old christopher marlow's; i take them from his tragedy, "the jew of
malta." the jew is a famous character, quite out of nature; but, when we
consider the terrible idea our simple ancestors had of a jew, not more
to be discommended for a certain discolouring (i think addison calls it)
than the witches and fairies of marlow's mighty successor. the scene is
betwixt barabas, the jew, and ithamora, a turkish captive exposed to
sale for a slave.

barabas
(_a precious rascal_.)

"as for myself, i walk abroad a-nights,
and kill sick people groaning under walls:
sometimes i go about, and poison wells;
and now and then, to cherish christian thieves,
i am content to lose some of my crowns,
that i may, walking in my gallery,
see'm go pinioned along by my door.
being young, i studied physic, and began
to practise first upon the italian:
there i enriched the priests with burials,
and always kept the sexton's arms in ure
with digging graves and ringing dead men's knells;
and, after that, was i an engineer,
and in the wars 'twixt france and germany,
under pretence of serving [helping] charles the fifth,
slew friend and enemy with my stratagems.
then after that was i an usurer,
and with extorting, cozening, forfeiting,
and tricks belonging unto brokery,
i fill'd the jails with bankrupts in a year,
and with young orphans planted hospitals,
and every moon made some or other mad;
and now and then one hang'd himself for grief,
pinning upon his breast a long great scroll.
how i with interest tormented him."

now hear ithamore, the other gentle nature, explain how he spent his
time:--

ithamore
(_a comical dog_.)

"faith, master, in setting christian villages on fire,
chaining of eunuchs, binding galley-slaves.
one time i was an hostler at [in] an inn,
and in the night-time secretly would i steal
to travellers' chambers, and there cut their throats.
once at jerusalem, where the pilgrims kneel'd,
i strowed powder on the marble stones,
and therewithal their knees would rankle so,
that i have laugh'd a-good to see the cripples
go limping home to christendom on stilts."

barabas

"why, this is something"--

there is a mixture of the ludicrous and the terrible in these lines,
brimful of genius and antique invention, that at first reminded me of
your old description of cruelty in hell, which was in the true
hogarthian style. i need not tell _you_ that marlow was author of that
pretty madrigal, "come live with me, and be my love," and of the tragedy
of "edward ii.," in which are certain _lines_ unequalled in our english
tongue. honest walton mentions the said madrigal under the denomination
of "certain smooth verses made long since by kit marlow."

i am glad you have put me on the scent after old quarles. if i do not
put up those eclogues, and that shortly, say i am no true-nosed hound. i
have had a letter from lloyd; the young metaphysician of caius is well,
and is busy recanting the new heresy, metaphysics, for the old dogma,
greek. my sister, i thank you, is quite well. she had a slight attack
the other day, which frightened me a good deal; but it went off
unaccountably. love and respects to edith.

yours sincerely,
c. lamb.

[the eclogue was "the ruined cottage," in which joanna and her widowed
mother are at first as happy as rosamund gray and old blind margaret. as
in lamb's story so in southey's poem, this state of felicity is
overturned by a seducer.

"an old woman clothed in gray." this ballad still eludes research. lamb
says that the first line put him upon writing _rosamund gray_, but he is
generally supposed to have taken his heroine's name from a song by
charles lloyd, entitled "rosamund gray," published among his _poems_ in
1795. at the end of the novel matravis, the seducer, in his ravings,
sings the ballad.

the "something" upon which lamb was then at work was his play "john
woodvil," in those early days known as "pride's cure."

"your old description of cruelty in hell." in "joan of arc." see letter
3.

"if i do not put up those eclogues." lamb does not return to this
subject.

lloyd had just gone to cambridge, to caius college.]




letter 37


charles lamb to robert southey

nov. 3, 1798.

i have read your eclogue ["the wedding"] repeatedly, and cannot call it
bald, or without interest; the cast of it, and the design are completely
original, and may set people upon thinking: it is as poetical as the
subject requires, which asks no poetry; but it is defective in pathos.
the woman's own story is the tamest part of it--i should like you to
remould that--it too much resembles the young maid's history: both had
been in service. even the omission would not injure the poem; after the
words "growing wants," you might, not unconnectedly, introduce "look at
that little chub" down to "welcome one." and, decidedly, i would have
you end it somehow thus,

"give them at least this evening a good meal.
                                     _gives her money_.
now, fare thee well; hereafter you have taught me
to give sad meaning to the village-bells," &c.,

which would leave a stronger impression (as well as more pleasingly
recall the beginning of the eclogue), than the present common-place
reference to a better world, which the woman "must have heard at
church." i should like you, too, a good deal to enlarge the most
striking part, as it might have been, of the poem--"is it idleness?"
&c., that affords a good field for dwelling on sickness and inabilities,
and old age. and you might also a good deal enrich the piece with a
picture of a country wedding: the woman might very well, in a transient
fit of oblivion, dwell upon the ceremony and circumstances of her own
nuptials six years ago, the smugness of the bride-groom, the feastings,
the cheap merriment, the welcomings, and the secret envyings of the
maidens--then dropping all this, recur to her present lot. i do not know
that i can suggest anything else, or that i have suggested anything new
or material.

i shall be very glad to see some more poetry, though i fear your trouble
in transcribing will be greater than the service my remarks may do them.

yours affectionately,

c. lamb.

i cut my letter short because i am called off to business.




letter 38


charles lamb to robert southey

nov. 8th, 1798.

i do not know that i much prefer this eclogue [lamb has received 'the
last of the flock'] to the last ['the wedding']; both are inferior to
the former ['the ruined cottage'].

"and when he came to shake me by the hand,
and spake as kindly to me as he used,
i hardly knew his voice--"

is the only passage that affected me.

servants speak, and their language ought to be plain, and not much
raised above the common, else i should find fault with the bathos of
this passage:

"and when i heard the bell strike out,
i thought (what?) that i had never heard it toll
so dismally before."

i like the destruction of the martens' old nests hugely, having just
such a circumstance in my memory.[1] i should be very glad to see your
remaining eclogue, if not too much trouble, as you give me reason to
expect it will be the second best.

i perfectly accord with your opinion of old wither. quarles is a wittier
writer, but wither lays more hold of the heart. quarles thinks of his
audience when he lectures; wither soliloquises in company with a full
heart. what wretched stuff are the "divine fancies" of quarles! religion
appears to him no longer valuable than it furnishes matter for quibbles
and riddles; he turns god's grace into wantonness. wither is like an old
friend, whose warm-heartedness and estimable qualities make us wish he
possessed more genius, but at the same time make us willing to dispense
with that want. i always love w., and sometimes admire q. still that
portrait poem is a fine one; and the extract from "the shepherds'
hunting" places him in a starry height far above quarles. if you wrote
that review in "crit. rev.," i am sorry you are so sparing of praise to
the "ancient marinere;"--so far from calling it, as you do, with some
wit, but more severity, "a dutch attempt," &c., i call it a right
english attempt, and a successful one, to dethrone german sublimity. you
have selected a passage fertile in unmeaning miracles, but have passed
by fifty passages as miraculous as the miracles they celebrate. i never
so deeply felt the pathetic as in that part,

"a spring of love gush'd from my heart,
and i bless'd them unaware--"

it stung me into high pleasure through sufferings. lloyd does not like
it; his head is too metaphysical, and your taste too correct; at least i
must allege something against you both, to excuse my own dotage--

"so lonely 'twas, that god himself
scarce seemed there to be!"--&c., &c.

but you allow some elaborate beauties--you should have extracted 'em.
"the ancient marinere" plays more tricks with the mind than that last
poem, which is yet one of the finest written. but i am getting too
dogmatical; and before i degenerate into abuse, i will conclude with
assuring you that i am

sincerely yours,

c. lamb.

i am going to meet lloyd at ware on saturday, to return on sunday. have
you any commands or commendations to the metaphysician? i shall be very
happy if you will dine or spend any time with me in your way through the
great ugly city; but i know you have other ties upon you in these parts.

love and respects to edith, and friendly remembrances to cottle.

[footnote 1: the destruction of the martens' nests, in "the last of the
family," runs thus:--

                          i remember,
eight months ago, when the young squire began
to alter the old mansion, they destroy'd
the martins' nests, that had stood undisturb'd
under that roof, ... ay! long before my memory.
i shook my head at seeing it, and thought
no good could follow.]

[lamb's ripe judgment of wither will be found in his essay "on the
poetical works of george wither," in the _works_, 1818 (see vol. i. of
this edition). "the portrait poem" would be "the author's meditation
upon sight of his picture," prefixed to _emblems_, 1635.

_lyrical ballads_, by wordsworth and coleridge, had just been published
by cottle. "the ancient mariner" stood first. "that last poem" was
wordsworth's "lines written a few miles above tintern abbey." southey
(?) reviewed the book in the _critical review_ for october, 1798. of the
"ancient mariner" he said: "it is a dutch attempt at german sublimity.
genius has here been employed in producing a poem of little merit."

here should come a letter from lamb to robert lloyd, dated november 13,
1798, not available for this edition. robert lloyd seems to have said in
his last letter that the world was drained of all its sweets. lamb sends
him a beautiful passage in praise of the world's good things--the first
foretaste in the correspondence of his later ecstatic manner.

here also should come a letter from lamb to southey, which apparently
does not now exist, containing "the dying lover," an extract from lamb's
play. i have taken the text from the version of the play sent to manning
late in 1800.

the dying lover

_margaret_. ... i knew a youth who died
for grief, because his love proved so,
and married to another.
i saw him on the wedding day,
for he was present in the church that day,
and in his best apparel too,
as one that came to grace the ceremony.
  i mark'd him when the ring was given,
his countenance never changed;
and when the priest pronounced the marriage blessing,
he put a silent prayer up for the bride,
_for they stood near who saw his lips move_.
he came invited to the marriage-feast
with the bride's friends,
and was the merriest of them all that day;
but they, who knew him best, call'd it feign'd mirth;
and others said,
he wore a smile like death's upon his face.
his presence dash'd all the beholders' mirth,
and he went away in tears.
   _simon_. what followed then?
   _marg_. oh! then
he did not as neglected suitors use
affect a life of solitude in shades,
but lived,
in free discourse and sweet society,
among his friends who knew his gentle nature best.
yet ever when he smiled,
there was a mystery legible in his face,
that whoso saw him said he was a man
not long for this world.--
and true it was, for even then
the silent love was feeding at his heart
of which he died:
nor ever spake word of reproach,
only he wish'd in death that his remains
might find a poor grave in some spot, not far
from his mistress' family vault, "being the place
where one day anna should herself be laid."

the line in italics lamb crossed through in the manning copy. the last
four lines he crossed through and marked "_very_ bad." i have reproduced
them here because of the autobiographical hint contained in the word
anna, which was the name given by lamb to his "fair-haired maid" in his
love sonnets.]




letter 39


charles lamb to robert southey
[probably november, 1798.]

the following is a second extract from my tragedy _that is to be_,--'tis
narrated by an old steward to margaret, orphan ward of sir walter
woodvil;--this, and the dying lover i gave you, are the only extracts i
can give without mutilation. i expect you to like the old woman's curse:

_old steward_.--one summer night, sir walter, as it chanc'd,
was pacing to & fro in the avenue
that westward fronts our house,
among those aged oaks, said to have been planted
three hundred years ago
by a neighb'ring prior of the woodvil name,
but so it was,
being overtask't in thought, he heeded not
the importune suitor who stood by the gate,
and beg'd an alms.
some say he shov'd her rudely from the gate
with angry chiding; but i can never think
(sir walter's nature hath a sweetness in it)
that he would use a woman--an old woman--
with such discourtesy;
for old she was who beg'd an alms of him.
well, he refus'd her;
whether for importunity, i know not,
or that she came between his meditations.
but better had he met a lion in the streets
than this old woman that night;
for she was one who practis'd the black arts.
and served the devil--being since burn'd for witchcraft.
she look'd at him like one that meant to blast him,
and with a frightful noise
('twas partly like a woman's voice,
and partly like the hissing of a snake)
she nothing said but this (sir walter told the words):

"a mischief, mischief, mischief,
and a nine-times killing curse,
by day and by night, to the caitive wight
who shakes the poor like snakes from his door,
and shuts up the womb of his purse;
and a mischief, mischief, mischief,
and a nine-fold withering curse,--
for that shall come to thee, that will render thee
both all that thou fear'st, and worse."

these words four times repeated, she departed,
leaving sir walter like a man beneath
whose feet a scaffolding had suddenly fal'n:
so he describ'd it.
_margaret_.--a terrible curse!
_old steward_.--o lady, such bad things are told of that old woman,
as, namely, that the milk she gave was sour,
and the babe who suck'd her shrivel'd like a mandrake;
and things besides, with a bigger horror in them,
almost, i think, unlawful to be told!
_margaret_.--then must i never hear them. but proceed,
and say what follow'd on the witch's curse.
_old steward_.--nothing immediate; but some nine months after,
young stephen woodvil suddenly fell sick,
and none could tell what ail'd him: for he lay,
and pin'd, and pin'd, that all his hair came off;
and he, that was full-flesh'd, became as thin
as a two-months' babe that hath been starved in the nursing;--
and sure, i think,
he bore his illness like a little child,
with such rare sweetness of dumb melancholy
he strove to clothe his agony in smiles,
which he would force up in his poor, pale cheeks,
like ill-tim'd guests that had no proper business there;--
and when they ask'd him his complaint, he laid
his hand upon his heart to show the place
where satan came to him a nights, he said,
and prick'd him with a pin.--
and hereupon sir walter call'd to mind
the beggar witch that stood in the gateway,
and begg'd an alms--
_margaret_.--i do not love to credit tales of magic.
heav'n's music, which is order, seems unstrung;
and this brave world,
creation's beauteous work, unbeautified,
disorder'd, marr'd, where such strange things are acted.

this is the extract i brag'd of, as superior to that i sent you from
marlow. perhaps you smile; but i should like your remarks on the above,
as you are deeper witch-read than i.

[the passage quoted in this letter, with certain alterations, became
afterwards "the witch," a dramatic sketch independent of "john woodvil."
by the phrase "without mutilation," lamb possibly means to suggest that
southey should print this sketch and "the dying lover" in the _annual
anthology_. that was not, however, done. "the witch" was first printed
in the _works_, 1818.

here should come a letter from lamb to robert lloyd, postmarked november
20, 1798, not available for this edition. in this letter lamb sends
lloyd the extract from "the witch" that was sent to southey.]




letter 40


charles lamb to robert southey

nov. 28th, 1798.

i can have no objection to your printing "mystery of god" with my name
and all due acknowledgments for the honour and favour of the
communication; indeed, 'tis a poem that can dishonour no name. now, that
is in the true strain of modern modesto-vanitas ... but for the sonnet,
i heartily wish it, as i thought it was, dead and forgotten. if the
exact circumstances under which i wrote could be known or told, it would
be an interesting sonnet; but to an indifferent and stranger reader it
must appear a very bald thing, certainly inadmissible in a compilation.
i wish you could affix a different name to the volume; there is a
contemptible book, a wretched assortment of vapid feelings, entitled
"pratt's gleanings," which hath damned and impropriated the title for
ever. pray think of some other. the gentleman is better known (better
had he remained unknown) by an ode to benevolence, written and spoken
for and at the annual dinner of the humane society, who walk in
procession once a-year, with all the objects of their charity before
them, to return god thanks for giving them such benevolent hearts.

i like "bishop bruno;" but not so abundantly as your "witch ballad,"
which is an exquisite thing of its kind.

i showed my "witch" and "dying lover" to dyer last night; but george
could not comprehend how that could be poetry which did not go upon ten
feet, as george and his predecessors had taught it to do; so george read
me some lectures on the distinguishing qualities of the ode, the
epigram, and the epic, and went home to illustrate his doctrine by
correcting a proof sheet of his own lyrics. george writes odes where the
rhymes, like fashionable man and wife, keep a comfortable distance of
six or eight lines apart, and calls that "observing the laws of verse."
george tells you, before he recites, that you must listen with great
attention, or you'll miss the rhymes. i did so, and found them pretty
exact. george, speaking of the dead ossian, exclaimeth, "dark are the
poet's eyes." i humbly represented to him that his own eyes were dark [?
light], and many a living bard's besides, and recommended "clos'd are
the poet's eyes." but that would not do. i found there was an antithesis
between the darkness of his eyes and the splendour of his genius; and i
acquiesced.

your recipe for a turk's poison is invaluable and truly marlowish....
lloyd objects to "shutting-up the womb of his purse" in my curse (which
for a christian witch in a christian country is not too mild, i hope);
do you object? 1 think there is a strangeness in the idea, as well as
"shaking the poor like snakes from his door," which suits the speaker.
witches illustrate, as fine ladies do, from their own familiar objects,
and snakes and the shutting up of wombs are in their way. i don't know
that this last charge has been before brought against 'em, nor either
the sour milk or the mandrake babe; but i affirm these be things a witch
would do if she could.

my tragedy will be a medley (as [? and] i intend it to be a medley) of
laughter and tears, prose and verse, and in some places rhyme, songs,
wit, pathos, humour, and, if possible, sublimity; at least, it is not a
fault in my intention, if it does not comprehend most of these
discordant colours. heaven send they dance not the "dance of death!" i
hear that the two noble englishmen have parted no sooner than they set
foot on german earth, but i have not heard the reason--possibly, to give
novelists an handle to exclaim, "ah me! what things are perfect?" i
think i shall adopt your emendation in the "dying lover," though i do
not myself feel the objection against "silent prayer."

my tailor has brought me home a new coat lapelled, with a velvet collar.
he assures me everybody wears velvet collars now. some are born
fashionable, some achieve fashion, and others, like your humble servant,
have fashion thrust upon them. the rogue has been making inroads
hitherto by modest degrees, foisting upon me an additional button,
recommending gaiters; but to come upon me thus in a full tide of luxury,
neither becomes him as a tailor nor the ninth of a man. my meek
gentleman was robbed the other day, coming with his wife and family in a
one-horse shay from hampstead; the villains rifled him of four guineas,
some shillings and half-pence, and a bundle of customers' measures,
which they swore were bank-notes. they did not shoot him, and when they
rode off he addrest them with profound gratitude, making a congee:
"gentlemen, i wish you good night, and we are very much obliged to you
that you have not used us ill!" and this is the cuckoo that has had the
audacity to foist upon me ten buttons on a side and a black velvet
collar--a damn'd ninth of a scoundrel!

when you write to lloyd, he wishes his jacobin correspondents to address
him as _mr_. c. l. love and respects to edith. i hope she is well.

yours sincerely,
c. lamb.

[the poem "mystery of god" was, when printed in the _annual anthology_
for 1799, entitled "living without god in the world." lamb never
reprinted it. it is not clear to what sonnet lamb refers, possibly that
to his sister, printed on page 78, which he himself never reprinted. it
was at that time intended to call southey's collection _gleanings_; lamb
refers to the _gleanings_ of samuel jackson pratt (1749-1814), a very
busy maker of books, published in 1795-1799. his _triumph of
benevolence_ was published in 1786.

southey's witch ballad was "the old woman of berkeley."

george dyer's principal works in verse are contained in his _poems_,
1802, and _poetics_, 1812. he retained the epithet "dark" for ossian's
eyes.

southey's recipe for a turk's poison i do not find. it may have existed
only in a letter.

a reference to the poem in letter 39 will explain the remarks about
witches' curses.

the two noble englishmen (a sarcastic reference drawn, i imagine from
palamon and arcite) were coleridge and wordsworth, then in germany.
nothing definite is known, but they seem quite amicably to have decided
to take independent courses.

"lloyd's jacobin correspondents." this is lamb's only allusion to the
attack which had been made by _the anti-jacobin_ upon himself, lloyd and
their friends, particularly coleridge and southey. in "the new
morality," in the last number of canning's paper, they had been thus
grouped:--

and ye five other wandering bards that move
in sweet accord of harmony and love,
c-----dge and s--tb--y, l--d, and l--be & co.
tune all your mystic harps to praise lepaux!

--lepaux being the high-priest of theophilanthropy. when "the new
morality" was reprinted in _the beauties of "the antijacobin_" in 1799,
a savage footnote on coleridge was appended, accusing him of hypocrisy
and the desertion of his wife and children, and adding "_ex uno disce_
his associates southey and lamb." again, in the first number of the
_anti-jacobin review and magazine_, august, 1798, was a picture by
gilray, representing the worshippers of lepaux, wherein lloyd and lamb
appeared as a toad and a frog reading their own _blank verse_, and
coleridge and southey, as donkeys, flourish "dactylics" and "saphics."
in september the federated poets were again touched upon in a parody of
the "ode to the passions":--

see! faithful to their mighty dam,
c----dge, s--th--y, l--d, and l--b
in splay-foot madrigals of love,
soft moaning like the widow'd dove,
pour, side-by-side, their sympathetic notes;
of equal rights, and civic feasts,
and tyrant kings, and knavish priests,
swift through the land the tuneful mischief floats.

and now to softer strains they struck the lyre,
they sung the beetle or the mole,
the dying kid, or ass's foal,
by cruel man permitted to expire.

lloyd took the caricature and the verses with his customary seriousness,
going so far as to indite a "letter to _the anti-jacobin_ reviewers,"
which was printed in birmingham in 1799. therein he defended lamb with
some vigour: "the person you have thus leagued in a partnership of
infamy with me is mr. charles lamb, a man who, so far from being a
democrat, would be the first person to assent to the opinions contained
in the foregoing pages: he is a man too much occupied with real and
painful duties--duties of high personal self-denial--to trouble himself
about speculative matters."]




letter 41


charles lamb to robert southey

dec. 27, 1798.

dear southey,--your friend john may has formerly made kind offers to
lloyd of serving me in the india house by the interest of his friend sir
francis baring--it is not likely that i shall ever put his goodness to
the test on my own account, for my prospects are very comfortable. but i
know a man, a young man, whom he could serve thro' the same channel, and
i think would be disposed to serve if he were acquainted with his case.
this poor fellow (whom i know just enough of to vouch for his strict
integrity & worth) has lost two or three employments from illness, which
he cannot regain; he was once insane, & from the distressful uncertainty
of his livelihood has reason to apprehend a return of that malady--he
has been for some time dependant on a woman whose lodger he formerly
was, but who can ill afford to maintain him, and i know that on
christmas night last he actually walk'd about the streets all night,
rather than accept of her bed, which she offer'd him, and offer'd
herself to sleep in the kitchen, and that in consequence of that severe
cold he is labouring under a bilious disorder, besides a depression of
spirits, which incapacitates him from exertion when he most needs
it--for god's sake, southey, if it does not go against you to ask
favors, do it now--ask it as for me--but do not do a violence to your
feelings, because he does not know of this application, and will suffer
no disappointment--what i meant to say was this--there are in the india
house what are called _extra clerks_, not on the establishment, like me,
but employed in extra business, by-jobs--these get about l50 a year, or
rather more, but never rise--a director can put in at any time a young
man in this office, and it is by no means consider'd so great a favor as
making an established clerk. he would think himself as rich as an
emperor if he could get such a certain situation, and be relieved from
those disquietudes which i do fear may one day bring back his
distemper--

you know john may better than i do, but i know enough to believe that he
is a good man--he did make me that offer i have mention'd, but you will
perceive that such an offer cannot authorize me in applying for another
person.

but i cannot help writing to you on the subject, for the young man is
perpetually before my eyes, and i should feel it a crime not to strain
all my petty interest to do him service, tho' i put my own delicacy to
the question by so doing--i have made one other unsuccessful attempt
already--

at all events i will thank you to write, for i am tormented with
anxiety--

i suppose you have somewhere heard that poor mary dollin has poisoned
herself, after some interviews with john reid, the ci-devant alphonso of
her days of hope.

how is edith?

c. lamb.

[john may was a friend and correspondent of southey whom he had met at
lisbon: not to be confounded with coleridge's inn-keeping may.

sir francis baring was a director of the east india company. 1 have no
knowledge as to who the young man was; nor have i any regarding mary
dollin and john reid.]




letter 42


charles lamb to robert southey

jan. 21st, 1799.

i am requested by lloyd to excuse his not replying to a kind letter
received from you. he is at present situated in most distressful family
perplexities, which i am not at liberty to explain; but they are such as
to demand all the strength of his mind, and quite exclude any attention
to foreign objects. his brother robert (the flower of his family) hath
eloped from the persecutions of his father, and has taken shelter with
me. what the issue of his adventure will be, i know not. he hath the
sweetness of an angel in his heart, combined with admirable firmness of
purpose: an uncultivated, but very original, and, i think, superior
genius. but this step of his is but a small part of their family
troubles.

i am to blame for not writing to you before on _my own account_; but i
know you can dispense with the expressions of gratitude, or i should
have thanked you before for all may's kindness. he has liberally
supplied the person i spoke to you of with money, and had procured him a
situation just after himself had lighted upon a similar one and engaged
too far to recede. but may's kindness was the same, and my thanks to you
and him are the same. may went about on this business as if it had been
his own. but you knew john may before this: so i will be silent.

i shall be very glad to hear from you when convenient. i do not know how
your calendar and other affairs thrive; but, above all, i have not heard
a great while of your "madoc"--the _opus magnum_. i would willingly send
you something to give a value to this letter; but i have only one slight
passage to send you, scarce worth the sending, which i want to edge in
somewhere into my play, which, by the way, hath not received the
addition of ten lines, besides, since i saw you. a father, old walter
woodvil (the witch's protege) relates this of his son john, who "fought
in adverse armies," being a royalist, and his father a parliamentary
man:--

"i saw him in the day of worcester fight,
whither he came at twice seven years,
under the discipline of the lord falkland
(his uncle by the mother's side,
who gave his youthful politics a bent
quite _from_ the principles of his father's house;)
there did i see this valiant lamb of mars,
this sprig of honour, this unbearded john,
this veteran in green years, this sprout, this woodvil,
(with dreadless ease guiding a fire-hot steed,
which seem'd to scorn the manage of a boy),
prick forth with such a _mirth_ into the field,
to mingle rivalship and acts of war
even with the sinewy masters of the art,--
you would have thought the work of blood had been
a play-game merely, and the rabid mars
had put his harmful hostile nature off,
to instruct raw youth in images of war,
and practice of the unedged players' foils.
the rough fanatic and blood-practised soldiery
seeing such hope and virtue in the boy,
disclosed their ranks to let him pass unhurt,
checking their swords' uncivil injuries,
as loth to mar that curious workmanship
of valour's beauty pourtray'd in his face."

lloyd objects to "pourtray'd in his face,"--do you? i like the line.

i shall clap this in somewhere. i think there is a spirit through the
lines; perhaps the 7th, 8th, and 9th owe their origin to shakspeare,
though no image is borrowed.

he says in "henry the fourth"--

"this infant hotspur,
mars in swathing clothes."

[see pt. i., iii., 2, 111, 112.]

but pray did lord falkland die before worcester fight? in that case i
must make bold to unclify some other nobleman.

kind love and respects to edith.

 c. lamb.

[charles lloyd's perplexities turned probably once again on the question
of his marriage. how long robert lloyd was with lamb we do not know; nor
of what nature were the "persecutions" to which he was subjected.
according to the evidence at our disposal, charles lloyd, sen., was a
good father.

southey's _madoc_ was not published until 1805.

the passage from the play was not printed in _john woodvil_. this,
together with "the dying lover" are to be found only in the discarded
version, printed in the notes to vol. iv. of the present edition. lord
falkland had been killed at newbury eight years before worcester fight.
lamb altered the names to ashley and naseby, although sir anthony cooper
was not made lord ashley until sixteen years after naseby was fought.]




letter 43


charles lamb to robert southey

[late january or early february, 1799.]

dr. southey,--lloyd will now be able to give you an account of himself,
so to him i leave you for satisfaction. great part of his troubles are
lightened by the partial recovery of his sister, who had been alarmingly
ill with similar diseases to his own. the other part of the family
troubles sleeps for the present, but i fear will awake at some future
time to _confound_ and _disunite_. he will probably tell you all about
it. robert still continues here with me, his father has proposed
nothing, but would willingly lure him back with fair professions. but
robert is endowed with a wise fortitude, and in this business has acted
quite from himself, and wisely acted. his parents must come forward in
the end. i like reducing parents to a sense of undutifulness. i like
confounding the relations of life. pray let me see you when you come to
town, and contrive to give me some of your company.

i thank you heartily for your intended presents, but do by no means see
the necessity you are under of burthening yourself thereby. you have
read old wither's supersedeas to small purpose. you object to my pauses
being at the end of my lines. i do not know any great difficulty i
should find in diversifying or changing my blank verse; but i go upon
the model of shakspere in my play, and endeavour after a colloquial ease
and spirit, something like him. i could so easily imitate milton's
versification; but my ear & feeling would reject it, or any approaches
to it, in the _drama_. i do not know whether to be glad or sorry that
witches have been detected aforetimes in shutting up of wombs. i
certainly invented that conceit, and its coincidence with fact is
incidental [? accidental], for i never heard it. i have not seen those
verses on col. despard--i do not read any newspapers. are they short, to
copy without much trouble? i should like to see them.

i just send you a few rhymes from my play, the only rhymes in it--a
forest-liver giving an account of his amusements:--

what sports have you in the forest?
not many,--some few,--as thus.
to see the sun to bed, and see him rise,
like some hot amourist with glowing eyes,
bursting the lazy bands of sleep that bound him:
with all his fires and travelling glories round him:
sometimes the moon on soft night-clouds to rest,
like beauty nestling in a young man's breast,
and all the winking stars, her handmaids, keep
admiring silence, while those lovers sleep:
sometimes outstretch'd in very idleness,
nought doing, saying little, thinking less,
to view the leaves, thin dancers upon air,
go eddying round; and small birds how they fare,
when mother autumn fills their beaks with corn,
filch'd from the careless amalthea's horn;
and how the woods berries and worms provide,
without their pains, when earth hath nought beside
to answer their small wants;
to view the graceful deer come trooping by,
then pause, and gaze, then turn they know not why,
like bashful younkers in society;
to mark the structure of a plant or tree;
and all fair things of earth, how fair they be! &c. &c.

i love to anticipate charges of unoriginality: the first line is almost
shakspere's:--

"to have my love to bed & to arise."
_midsummer nights dream_ [iii., i, 174].

i think there is a sweetness in the versification not unlike some rhymes
in that exquisite play, and the last line but three is yours:

"an eye
that met the gaze, or turn'd it knew not why."
_rosamund's epistle_.

i shall anticipate all my play, and have nothing to shew you. an idea
for leviathan:--

commentators on job have been puzzled to find out a meaning for
leviathan,--'tis a whale, say some; a crocodile, say others. in my
simple conjecture, leviathan is neither more nor less than the lord
mayor of london for the time being.

"rosamund" sells well in london, maugre the non-reviewal of it.

i sincerely wish you better health, & better health to edith, kind
remembrances to her.

c. lamb.

if you come to town by ash wednesday [february 6], you will certainly
see lloyd here--i expect him by that time.

my sister mary was never in better health or spirits than now.

[writing in june, 1799, to robert lloyd, priscilla, his sister, says:
"lamb would not i think by any means be a person to take up your abode
with. he is too much like yourself--he would encourage those feelings
which it certainly is your duty to suppress. your station in life--the
duties which are pointed out by that rank in society which you are
destined to fill--differ widely from his." when next we hear of robert
lloyd he has returned to birmingham, where his father soon afterwards
bought him a partnership in a bookselling and printing business.

"col. despard." i have not found the verses. colonel edward marcus
despard, after a career that began brilliantly, was imprisoned in the
spring of 1798 and executed for high treason in 1803.

the rhymed passage from _john woodvil_ is that which is best known.
hazlitt relates that godwin was so taken with it when he first read it
that he asked every one he met to tell him the author and play, and at
last applied to lamb himself.]




letter 44


charles lamb to robert southey
march 15th, 1799.

dear southey,--i have received your little volume, for which i thank
you, though i do not entirely approve of this sort of intercourse, where
the presents are all one side. i have read the last eclogue again with
great pleasure. it hath gained considerably by abridgment, and now i
think it wants nothing but enlargement. you will call this one of tyrant
procrustes' criticisms, to cut and pull so to his own standard; but the
old lady is so great a favourite with me, i want to hear more of her;
and of "joanna" you have given us still less. but the picture of the
rustics leaning over the bridge, and the old lady travelling abroad on a
summer evening to see her garden watered, are images so new and true,
that i decidedly prefer this "ruin'd cottage" to any poem in the book.
indeed i think it the only one that will bear comparison with your "hymn
to the penates" in a former volume.

i compare dissimilar things, as one would a rose and a star for the
pleasure they give us, or as a child soon learns to choose between a
cake and a rattle; for dissimilars have mostly some points of
comparison. the next best poem, i think, is the first eclogue; 'tis very
complete, and abounding in little pictures and realities. the remainder
eclogues, excepting only the "funeral," i do not greatly admire. i miss
_one_, which had at least as good a title to publication as the "witch,"
or the "sailor's mother." you call'd it the "last of the family." the
"old woman of berkeley" comes next; in some humours i would give it the
preference above any. but who the devil is matthew of westminster? you
are as familiar with these antiquated monastics, as swedenborg, or, as
his followers affect to call him, the baron, with his invisibles. but
you have raised a very comic effect out of the true narrative of matthew
of westminster. 'tis surprising with how little addition you have been
able to convert with so little alteration his incidents, meant for
terror, into circumstances and food for the spleen. the parody is _not_
so successful; it has one famous line indeed, which conveys the finest
death-bed image i ever met with:

"the doctor whisper'd the nurse, and the surgeon knew what he said."

but the offering the bride three times bears not the slightest analogy
or proportion to the fiendish noises three times heard! in "jaspar," the
circumstance of the great light is very affecting. but i had heard you
mention it before. the "rose" is the only insipid piece in the volume;
it hath neither thorns nor sweetness, and, besides, sets all chronology
and probability at defiance.

"cousin margaret," you know, i like. the allusions to the "pilgrim's
progress" are particularly happy, and harmonise tacitly and delicately
with old cousins and aunts. to familiar faces we do associate familiar
scenes and accustomed objects; but what hath apollidon and his
sea-nymphs to do in these affairs? apollyon i could have borne, though
he stands for the devil; but who is apollidon? i think you are too apt
to conclude faintly, with some cold moral, as in the end of the poem
called "the victory"--

"be thou her comforter, who art the widow's friend;"

a single common-place line of comfort, which bears no proportion in
weight or number to the many lines which describe suffering. this is to
convert religion into mediocre feelings, which should burn, and glow,
and tremble. a moral should be wrought into the body and soul, the
matter and tendency, of a poem, not tagged to the end, like a "god send
the good ship into harbour," at the conclusion of our bills of lading.
the finishing of the "sailor" is also imperfect. any dissenting minister
may say and do as much.

these remarks, i know, are crude and unwrought; but i do not lay claim
to much accurate thinking. i never judge system-wise of things, but
fasten upon particulars. after all, there is a great deal in the book
that i must, for time, leave _unmentioned_, to deserve my thanks for its
own sake, as well as for the friendly remembrances implied in the gift.
i again return you my thanks.

pray present my love to edith. c. l.

[southey's little volume was vol. ii. of the second edition of his
_poems_, published in 1799. the last of the english eclogues included in
it was "the ruined cottage," slightly altered from the version referred
to in letter 38. the "hymn to the penates" brought the first volume of
this edition to a close. the first eclogue was "the old mansion house."
"the old woman of berkeley" was called "a ballad showing how an old
woman rode double and who rode before her." it was preceded by a long
quotation in latin from matthew of westminster. matthew of westminster
is the imaginary name given to the unknown authors of a chronicle called
_flares historiarum_, belonging probably to the fifteenth century. the
parody was "the surgeon's warning," which begins with the two lines that
lamb prints as one:--

the doctor whisper'd to the nurse,
and the surgeon knew what he said.

"the rose" was blank verse, addressed to edith southey. "cousin
margaret" was a "metrical letter written from london," in which there
are allusions to bunyan. the reference to apollidon is explained by
these lines:--

the sylphs should waft us to some goodly isle,
like that where whilome old apollidon
built up his blameless spell.]




letter 45


charles lamb to robert southey

march 2oth, 1799.

i am hugely pleased with your "spider," "your old freemason," as you
call him. the three first stanzas are delicious; they seem to me a
compound of burns and old quarles, those kind of home-strokes, where
more is felt than strikes the ear; a terseness, a jocular pathos, which
makes one feel in laughter. the measure, too, is novel and pleasing. i
could almost wonder rob. burns in his lifetime never stumbled upon it.
the fourth stanza is less striking, as being less original. the fifth
falls off. it has no felicity of phrase, no old-fashioned phrase or
feeling.

"young hopes, and love's delightful dreams,"

savour neither of burns nor quarles; they seem more like shreds of many
a modern sentimental sonnet. the last stanza hath nothing striking in
it, if i except the two concluding lines, which are burns all over. i
wish, if you concur with me, these things could be looked to. i am sure
this is a kind of writing, which comes tenfold better recommended to the
heart, comes there more like a neighbour or familiar, than thousands of
hamuels and zillahs and madelons. i beg you will send me the
"holly-tree," if it at all resemble this, for it must please me. i have
never seen it. i love this sort of poems, that open a new intercourse
with the most despised of the animal and insect race. i think this vein
may be further opened; peter pindar hath very prettily apostrophised a
fly; burns hath his mouse and his louse; coleridge, less successfully,
hath made overtures of intimacy to a jackass, therein only following at
unresembling distance sterne and greater cervantes. besides these, i
know of no other examples of breaking down the partition between us and
our "poor earth-born companions." it is sometimes revolting to be put in
a track of feeling by other people, not one's own immediate thoughts,
else i would persuade you, if i could (i am in earnest), to commence a
series of these animal poems, which might have a tendency to rescue some
poor creatures from the antipathy of mankind. some thoughts come across
me;--for instance--to a rat, to a toad, to a cockchafer, to a
mole--people bake moles alive by a slow oven-fire to cure consumption.
rats are, indeed, the most despised and contemptible parts of god's
earth. i killed a rat the other day by punching him to pieces, and feel
a weight of blood upon me to this hour. toads you know are made to fly,
and tumble down and crush all to pieces. cockchafers are old sport; then
again to a worm, with an apostrophe to anglers, those patient tyrants,
meek inflictors of pangs intolerable, cool devils; to an owl; to all
snakes, with an apology for their poison; to a cat in boots or bladders.
your own fancy, if it takes a fancy to these hints, will suggest many
more. a series of such poems, suppose them accompanied with plates
descriptive of animal torments, cooks roasting lobsters, fishmongers
crimping skates, &c., &c., would take excessively. i will willingly
enter into a partnership in the plan with you: i think my heart and soul
would go with it too--at least, give it a thought. my plan is but this
minute come into my head; but it strikes me instantaneously as something
new, good and useful, full of pleasure and full of moral. if old quarles
and wither could live again, we would invite them into our firm. burns
hath done his part. i the other day threw off an extempore epitaph on
ensign peacock of the 3rd regt. of the royal east india volunteers, who
like other boys in this scarlet tainted age was ambitious of playing at
soldiers, but dying in the first flash of his valour was at the
particular instance of his relations buried with military honours! like
any veteran scarr'd or chopt from blenheim or ramilies. (he was buried
in sash and gorget.)

marmor loquitur

he lies a volunteer so fine,
who died of a decline,
as you or i, may do one day;
reader, think of this, i pray;
and i numbly hope you'll drop a tear
for my poor royal volunteer.
he was as brave as brave could be,
nobody was so brave as he;
he would have died in honor's bed,
only he died at home instead.
well may the royal regiment swear,
they never had such a volunteer.
but whatsoever they may say,
death is a man that will have his way:
tho' he was but an ensign in this world of pain;
in the next we hope he'll be a captain.
and without meaning to make any reflection on his mentals,
he begg'd to be buried in regimentals.

sed hae sunt lamentabilis nugae--but 'tis as good as some epitaphs you and
i have read together in christ-church-yard.

poor sam. le grice! i am afraid the world, and the camp, and the
university, have spoilt him among them. 'tis certain he had at one time
a strong capacity of turning out something better. i knew him, and that
not long since, when he had a most warm heart. i am ashamed of the
indifference i have sometimes felt towards him. i think the devil is in
one's heart. i am under obligations to that man for the warmest
friendship and heartiest sympathy, even for an agony of sympathy exprest
both by word and deed, and tears for me, when i was in my greatest
distress. but i have forgot that! as, i fear, he has nigh forgot the
awful scenes which were before his eyes when he served the office of a
comforter to me. no service was too mean or troublesome for him to
perform. i can't think what but the devil, "that old spider," could have
suck'd my heart so dry of its sense of all gratitude. if he does come in
your way, southey, fail not to tell him that i retain a most
affectionate remembrance of his old friendliness, and an earnest wish to
resume our intercourse. in this i am serious. i cannot recommend him to
your society, because i am afraid whether he be quite worthy of it. but
i have no right to dismiss him from _my_ regard. he was at one time, and
in the worst of times, my own familiar friend, and great comfort to me
then. i have known him to play at cards with my father, meal-times
excepted, literally all day long, in long days too, to save me from
being teased by the old man, when i was not able to bear it.

god bless him for it, and god bless you, southey.

c. l.

[peter pindar (dr. john wolcot) has an ode "to a fly, taken out of a
bowl of punch." he also wrote "the lousiad."

"poor earth-born companions." from burns' "lines to a mouse," 2nd
stanza, line 5.

"toads are made to fly." filliping the toad was an old pastime. a toad
was placed on one end of a piece of wood, laid crosswise over a stone.
the other end was struck with a beetle (_i.e._, a mallet), and the toad
flew into the air. falstaff says: "fillip me with a three-man beetle."
as to worms and fishermen, the late mrs. coe, who as a girl had known
lamb at widford, told me that he could rarely, if ever, be tempted to
join the anglers. affixing the worm was too much for him. "barbarous,
barbarous," he used to say.

lamb's project for a series of animal poems has to some extent been
carried out by a living poet, mr. a. c. benson. neither lamb nor southey
pursued it.

we met sam le grice in the letter of october 3, 1796. to what escapade
lamb refers i do not know, but he was addicted to folly. it was sam le
grice of whom leigh hunt in his _autobiography_ tells the excellent tale
that he excused himself to his master for not having performed a task,
by the remark that he had had a "lethargy."

in april of this year died john lamb, the father. charles lamb probably
at once moved from 45 chapel street to no. 36, where mary lamb joined
him.

between this and the next letter should probably come a letter from lamb
to robert lloyd, not available for this edition. it seems to follow upon
robert lloyd's departure from lamb's house, and remarks that lamb knows
but one being that he could ever consent to live perpetually with, and
that is robert--but robert must go whither prudence and paternal
regulations dictate. lamb also refers to a poem of an intimate character
by charles lloyd in the _annual anthology_ ("lines to a brother and
sister"), remarking that, in his opinion, these domestic addresses
should not always be made public. there is also a reference to charles
lloyd's novel, which lamb says he wants to read if he may be permitted a
sight of it. this would be _isabel_.]




letter 46


charles lamb to robert southey

oct. 31st, 1799.

dear southey,--i have but just got your letter, being returned from
herts, where i have passed a few red-letter days with much pleasure. i
would describe the county to you, as you have done by devonshire, but
alas! i am a poor pen at that same. i could tell you of an old house
with a tapestry bed-room, the "judgment of solomon" composing one
pannel, and "actaeon spying diana naked" the other. i could tell of an
old marble hall, with hogarth's prints and the roman caesars in marble
hung round. i could tell of a _wilderness_, and of a village church, and
where the bones of my honoured grandam lie; but there are feelings which
refuse to be translated, sulky aborigines, which will not be naturalised
in another soil. of this nature are old family faces and scenes of
infancy.

i have given your address, and the books you want, to the arches; they
will send them as soon as they can get them, but they do not seem quite
familiar to [? with] their names. i have seen gebor! gebor aptly so
denominated from geborish, _quasi_ gibberish. but gebor hath some lucid
intervals. i remember darkly one beautiful simile veiled in uncouth
phrases about the youngest daughter of the ark. i shall have nothing to
communicate, i fear, to the anthology. you shall have some fragments of
my play, if you desire them, but i think i would rather print it whole.
have you seen it, or shall i lend you a copy? i want your opinion of it.

i must get to business, so farewell. my kind remembrances to edith.

c. lamb.

[lamb had probably been staying at widford. many years later he
described his hertfordshire days in more than one essay (see the _elia_
essays "mackery end" and "blakesmoor in h-----shire" and
"dream-children"). the old house was, of course, blakesware. the
wilderness, which lay at the back of the house, is, with widford,
mentioned in _rosamund gray_.

the arches were the brothers arch, the booksellers of ludgate hill.

gebor stands for _gebir_, landor's poem, published in 1798. the simile
in question would be this: from book vii., lines 248-251:--

never so eager, when the world was waves,
stood the less daughter of the ark, and tried
(innocent this temptation) to recall
with folded vest and casting arm the dove.

the reference to southey's anthology is to vol. ii., then in
preparation. the play was now finished: it circulated in manuscript
before being published in 1802.

in a letter to robert lloyd, dated december 17, 1799, lamb thanks him
for a present of porter, adding that wine makes him hot, and brandy
drunk, but porter warms without intoxication.

here should come an unpublished letter from lamb to charles lloyd at
cambridge, asking for the return of his play. kemble, he says, had
offered to put it in the hands of the proprietor of drury lane, and
therefore lamb wishes to have a second copy in the house. kemble, as it
turned out, returned no answer for a year, and then he stated that he
had lost the copy.

lamb mentions coleridge's settlement with his family in lodgings in the
adelphi. coleridge, having returned from germany and undertaken work for
the _morning post_, took lodgings at 21 buckingham street, strand, close
to the adelphi, in november, 1799.

the letter is interesting in containing the first mention of manning,
whom we are now to meet.]




letter 47


charles lamb to thomas manning

dec., 1799.

dear manning,--the particular kindness, even up to a degree of
attachment, which i have experienced from you, seems to claim some
distinct acknowledgment on my part. i could not content myself with a
bare remembrance to you, conveyed in some letter to lloyd.

will it be agreeable to you, if i occasionally recruit your memory of
me, which must else soon fade, if you consider the brief intercourse we
have had. i am not likely to prove a troublesome correspondent. my
scribbling days are past. i shall have no sentiments to communicate, but
as they spring up from some living and worthy occasion.

i look forward with great pleasure to the performance of your promise,
that we should meet in london early in the ensuing year. the century
must needs commence auspiciously for me, that brings with it manning's
friendship as an earnest of its after gifts.

i should have written before, but for a troublesome inflammation in one
of my eyes, brought on by night travelling with the coach windows
sometimes up.

what more i have to say shall be reserved for a letter to lloyd. i must
not prove tedious to you in my first outset, lest i should affright you
by my ill-judged loquacity. i am, yours most sincerely, c. lamb.

[this is the first letter that has been preserved in the correspondence
between lamb and manning. lamb first met manning at cambridge, in the
autumn of 1799, when on a visit to charles lloyd. much of manning's
history will be unfolded as the letters proceed, but here it should be
stated that he was born on november 8, 1772, and was thus a little more
than two years older than lamb. he was at this time acting as private
tutor in mathematics at cambridge, among his pupils being charles lloyd,
of caius, manning's own college. manning, however, did not take his
degree, owing to an objection to oaths and tests.

lamb's reference to the beginning of the century shows that he shared
with many other non-mathematically-minded persons the belief that the
century begins with the hundredth, and not the hundred and first, year.
he says of manning, in the _elia_ essay "the old and the new
schoolmaster": "my friend m., with great painstaking, got me to think i
understood the first proposition in euclid, but gave me over in despair
at the second."]




letter 48


charles lamb to thomas manning

dec. 28th, 1799.

dear manning,--having suspended my correspondence a decent interval, as
knowing that even good things may be taken to satiety, a wish cannot but
recur to learn whether you be still well and happy. do all things
continue in the state i left them in cambridge?

do your night parties still flourish? and do you continue to bewilder
your company with your thousand faces running down through all the keys
of idiotism (like lloyd over his perpetual harpsicord), from the smile
and the glimmer of half-sense and quarter-sense to the grin and hanging
lip of betty foy's own johnny? and does the face-dissolving curfew sound
at twelve? how unlike the great originals were your petty terrors in the
postscript, not fearful enough to make a fairy shudder, or a lilliputian
fine lady, eight months full of child, miscarry. yet one of them, which
had more beast than the rest, i thought faintly resembled _one_ of your
brutifications. but, seriously, i long to see your own honest
manning-face again. i did not mean a pun,--your _man's_ face, you will
be apt to say, i know your wicked will to pun. i cannot now write to
lloyd and you too, so you must convey as much interesting intelligence
as this may contain, or be thought to contain, to him and sophia, with
my dearest love and remembrances.

by the by, i think you and sophia both incorrect with regard to the
_title_ of the _play_. allowing your objection (which is not necessary,
as pride may be, and is in real life often, cured by misfortunes not
directly originating from its own acts, as jeremy taylor will tell you a
naughty desire is sometimes sent to cure it--i know you read these
_practical divines_). but allowing your objection, does not the
betraying of his father's secret directly spring from pride?--from the
pride of wine and a full heart, and a proud over-stepping of the
ordinary rules of morality, and contempt of the prejudices of mankind,
which are not to bind superior souls--"as _trust_ in _the matter_ of
_secret_ all _ties_ of _blood_, &c., &c., keeping of _promises_, the
feeble mind's religion, binding our _morning knowledge_ to the
performance of what _last night's ignorance_ spake"--does he not prate,
that "_great spirits_" must do more than die for their friend--does not
the pride of wine incite him to display some evidence of friendship,
which its own irregularity shall make great? this i know, that i meant
his punishment not alone to be a cure for his daily and habitual
_pride_, but the direct consequence and appropriate punishment of a
particular act of pride.

if you do not understand it so, it is my fault in not explaining my
meaning.

i have not seen coleridge since, and scarcely expect to see
him,--perhaps he has been at cambridge. i dined with him in town and
breakfasted with him and priscilla, who you may tell charles has
promised to come and see me when she returns [to] clapham. i will write
to charles on monday.

need i turn over to blot a fresh clean half-sheet? merely to say, what i
hope you are sure of without my repeating it, that i would have you
consider me, dear manning, your sincere friend,

c. lamb.

what is your proper address?

["betty foy's own johnny"--"the idiot boy," in the _lyrical ballads_.

"in the postscript." a reference presumably to some drawings of faces in
one of manning's letters.

"the title of the play." writing to lamb on december 15, 1799, manning
had said: "i had some conversation the other day with sophia concerning
your tragedy; and she made some very sensible observations (as i
thought) with respect to the unfitness of its title, 'the folly,' whose
consequences humble the pride and ambition of john's heart, does not
originate in the workings of those passions, but from an underpart in
his character, and as it were accidentally, _viz_., from the ebullitions
of a drunken mind and from a rash confidence."

"you will understand what i mean, without my explaining myself any
further. god bless you, and keep you from all evil things, that walk
upon the face of the earth--i mean nightmares, hobgoblins and spectres."

lamb refers in this letter particularly to act iii. of his play. "i have
not seen coleridge since." since when is not clear. possibly coleridge
had been at cambridge when lamb was there.]




letter 49


charles lamb to s.t. coleridge
? jan. 23, 1800.

dear coleridge,--now i write, i cannot miss this opportunity of
acknowledging the obligations myself, and the readers in general of that
luminous paper, the "morning post," are under to you for the very novel
and exquisite manner in which you combined political with grammatical
science, in your yesterday's dissertation on mr. wyndham's unhappy
composition. it must have been the death-blow to that ministry. i expect
pitt and grenville to resign. more especially the delicate and
cottrellian grace with which you officiated, with a ferula for a white
wand, as gentleman usher to the word "also," which it seems did not know
its place.

i expect manning of cambridge in town to-night--will you fulfil your
promise of meeting him at my house? he is a man of a thousand. give me a
line to say what day, whether saturday, sunday, monday, &c., and if sara
and the philosopher can come. i am afraid if i did not at intervals call
upon you, i should _never see you_. but i forget, the affairs of the
nation engross your time and your mind.

farewell. c.l.

[the first letter that has been preserved of the second period of lamb's
correspondence with coleridge, which was to last until the end.

in the _morning post_ of january 7, 1800, had appeared the
correspondence between buonaparte and lord grenville, in which
buonaparte made an offer of peace. lord grenville's note, it was pointed
out in the _morning post_ for january 16, was really written by william
windham, secretary for war, and on january 22 appeared an article
closely criticising its grammar.

here is the passage concerning "also," to which lamb particularly
alludes a little later in the letter:--

... "the _same_ system, to the prevalence of which france justly
ascribes all her present miseries, is that which has _also_ involved the
rest of europe in a long and destructive warfare, of a nature long since
unknown _to_ the practice of civilized nations." here the connective
word "also" should have followed the word "europe." as it at present
stands, the sentence implies that france, miserable as she may be, has,
however, not been involved in a warfare. the word "same" is absolutely
expletive; and by appearing to refer the reader to some foregoing
clause, it not only loads the sentence, but renders it obscure. the word
"to" is absurdly used for the word "in." a thing may be unknown _to_
practitioners, as humanity and sincerity may be unknown to the
practitioners of state-craft, and foresight, science, and harmony may
have been unknown to the planners and practitioners of continental
expeditions; but even "cheese-parings and candle-ends" cannot be known
or unknown "_to_" a practice!!

windham was destined to be attacked by another stalwart in lamb's
circle, for it was his speech in opposition to lord erskine's cruelty to
animals bill in 1809 that inspired john lamb to write his fierce
pamphlet (see page 434).

"cottrellian grace." the cotterells were masters of the ceremonies from
1641 to 1808.

the philosopher was hartley coleridge, aged three, so called after his
great namesake, david hartley. the coleridges were now, as we have seen,
living at 21 buckingham street, strand.]




letter 50


charles lamb to thomas manning

[p.m. feb. 13, 1800.]

dear manning,--olivia is a good girl, and if you turn to my letter, you
will find that this very plea you set up to vindicate lloyd i had made
use of as a reason why he should never have employed olivia to make a
copy of such a letter--a letter i could not have sent to my enemy's
b----h, if she had thought fit to seek me in the way of marriage. but
you see it in one view, i in another. rest you merry in your opinion!
opinion is a species of property; and though i am always desirous to
share with my friend to a certain extent, i shall ever like to keep some
tenets and some property properly my own. some day, manning, when we
meet, substituting corydon and fair amaryllis, for charles lloyd and
mary hayes, we will discuss together this question of moral feeling, "in
what cases and how far sincerity is a virtue?" i do not mean truth--a
good olivia-like creature--god bless her, who, meaning no offence, is
always ready to give an answer when she is asked why she did so and so;
but a certain forward-talking half-brother of hers, sincerity, that
amphibious gentleman, who is so ready to perk up his obnoxious
sentiments unasked into your notice, as midas would his ears into your
face uncalled for. but i despair of doing anything by a letter in the
way of explaining or coming to explanations. a good wish, or a pun, or a
piece of secret history, may be well enough that way conveyed; nay, it
has been known that intelligence of a turkey hath been conveyed by that
medium without much ambiguity. godwin i am a good deal pleased with. he
is a very well-behaved, decent man, nothing very brilliant about him, or
imposing, as you may suppose; quite another guess sort of gentleman from
what your anti-jacobin christians imagine him. i was well pleased to
find he has neither horns nor claws; quite a tame creature, i assure
you. a middle-sized man, both in stature and in understanding; whereas,
from his noisy fame, you would expect to find a briareus centimanus, or
a tityus tall enough to pull jupiter from his heavens.

i begin to think you atheists not quite so tall a species. coleridge
inquires after you pretty often. i wish to be the pandar to bring you
together again once before i die. when we die, you and i must part; the
sheep, you know, take the right hand, and the goats the left. stripped
of its allegory, you must know, the sheep are _i_ and the apostles, and
the martyrs, and the popes, and bishop taylor, and bishop horsley, and
coleridge, &c., &c.; the goats are the atheists and the adulterers, and
dumb dogs, and godwin and m-----g, and that thyestaean crew--yaw! how my
saintship sickens at the idea!

you shall have my play and the falstaff letters in a day or two. i will
write to lloyd by this day's post.

pray, is it a part of your sincerity to show my letters to lloyd? for
really, gentlemen ought to explain their virtues upon a first
acquaintance, to prevent mistakes.

god bless you, manning. take my trifling _as trifling_; and believe me,
seriously and deeply,

your well-wisher and friend,

c. l.

[mary hayes was a friend of mary wollstonecraft, and also of southey and
coleridge. she wrote a novel, _memoirs of emma courtney_, which lloyd
says contained her own love letters to godwin and frend, and also
_female biography, or memoirs of illustrious and celebrated women_.
lloyd and she had been very intimate. a passage from a letter of
coleridge to southey, dated january 25, 1800, bears upon the present
situation: "miss hayes i have seen. charles lloyd's conduct has been
atrocious beyond what you stated. lamb himself confessed to me that
during the time in which he kept up his ranting, sentimental
correspondence with miss hayes, he frequently read her letters in
company, as a subject for _laughter_, and then sate down and answered
them quite _a la rousseau_! poor lloyd! every hour new-creates him; he
is his own posterity in a perpetually flowing series, and his body
unfortunately retaining an external identity, _their_ mutual
contradictions and disagreeings are united under one name, and of course
are called lies, treachery, and rascality!"

another letter from lamb to manning at this time tells the story of the
charles lloyd and mary hayes imbroglio. lloyd had written to miss hayes
a very odd letter concerning her godwinite creed, in which he refers to
her belief that she was in love with him and repeats old stories that
she had been in love both with godwin and frend. here is one sentence:
"in the confounding medley of ordinary conversation, i have interwoven
my abhorrence of your principles with a glanced contempt for your
personal character." this letter lloyd had given to his sister olivia to
copy--"an ignorant quaker girl," says lamb, "i mean ignorant in the best
sense, who ought not to know, that such a thing was possible or in rerum
naturae that a woman should court a man." later: "as long as lloyd or i
have known col. [coleridge] so long have we known him in the daily and
hourly habit of quizzing the world by lyes, most unaccountable and most
disinterested fictions." and here is one more passage: "to sum up my
inferences from the above facts, i am determined to live a merry life in
the midst of sinners. i try to consider all men as such, and to pitch
any expectations from human nature as low as possible. in this view, all
unexpected virtues are godsends and beautiful exceptions."

lamb had just met william godwin (1756-1836), probably having been
introduced to him by coleridge. godwin, known chiefly by his _political
justice_, 1793; _caleb williams_, 1794, and _st. leon_, 1799, stood at
that time for everything that was advanced in thought and conduct. we
shall meet with him often in the correspondence of the next few years.

bishop horsley (then of rochester, afterwards st. asaph's) was probably
included ironically, on account of his hostility to priestley.]




letter 51


charles lamb to thomas manning

[p.m. march 1, 1800.]

i hope by this time you are prepared to say the "falstaf's letters" are
a bundle of the sharpest, queerest, profoundest humours, of any these
juice-drained latter times have spawned. i should have advertised you,
that the meaning is frequently hard to be got at; and so are the future
guineas, that now lie ripening and aurifying in the womb of some
undiscovered potosi; but dig, dig, dig, dig, manning! i set to with an
unconquerable propulsion to write, with a lamentable want of what to
write. my private goings on are orderly as the movements of the spheres,
and stale as their music to angels' ears. public affairs--except as they
touch upon me, and so turn into private, i cannot whip up my mind to
feel any interest in. i grieve, indeed, that war and nature, and mr.
pitt, that hangs up in lloyd's best parlour, should have conspired to
call up three necessaries, simple commoners as our fathers knew them,
into the upper house of luxuries; bread, and beer, and coals, manning.
but as to france and frenchmen, and the abbe sieyes and his
constitutions, i cannot make these present times present to me. i read
histories of the past, and i live in them; although, to abstract senses,
they are far less momentous than the noises which keep europe awake. i
am reading burnet's own times. did you ever read that garrulous,
pleasant history? he tells his story like an old man past political
service, bragging to his sons on winter evenings of the part he took in
public transactions, when his "old cap was new." full of scandal, which
all true history is. no palliatives, but all the stark wickedness, that
actually gives the _momentum_ to national actors. quite the prattle of
age and out-lived importance. truth and sincerity staring out upon you
perpetually in _alto relievo_. himself a party man--he makes you a party
man. none of the damned philosophical humeian indifference, so cold, and
unnatural, and inhuman! none of the damned gibbonian fine writing, so
fine and composite. none of mr. robertson's periods with three members.
none of mr. roscoe's sage remarks, all so apposite, and coming in so
clever, lest the reader should have had the trouble of drawing an
inference. burnet's good old prattle i can bring present to my mind--i
can make the revolution present to me; the french revolution, by a
converse perversity in my nature, i fling as far _from_ me. to quit this
damn'd subject, and to relieve you from two or three dismal yawns, which
i hear in spirit, i here conclude my more than commonly obtuse letter;
dull up to the dulness of a dutch commentator on shakspeare.

my love to lloyd and sophia. c. l.

["war and nature, and mr. pitt." the war had sent up taxation to an
almost unbearable height. pitt was chancellor of exchequer, as well as
prime minister.

hume, gibbon and robertson were among the books which, in the elia essay
"detached thoughts on books and reading," lamb described as
_biblia-a-biblia_. william roscoe's principal work was his _life of
lorenzo de' medici_, 1795.]




letter 52


charles lamb to thomas manning

[p.m. march 17, 1800.]

dear manning,--i am living in a continuous feast. coleridge has been
with me now for nigh three weeks, and the more i see of him in the
quotidian undress and relaxation of his mind, the more cause i see to
love him, and believe him a _very good man_, and all those foolish
impressions to the contrary fly off like morning slumbers. he is engaged
in translations, which i hope will keep him this month to come. he is
uncommonly kind and friendly to me. he ferrets me day and night to _do
something_. he tends me, amidst all his own worrying and
heart-oppressing occupations, as a gardener tends his young _tulip_.
marry come up! what a pretty similitude, and how like your humble
servant! he has lugged me to the brink of engaging to a newspaper, and
has suggested to me for a first plan the forgery of a supposed
manuscript of burton the anatomist of melancholy. i have even written
the introductory letter; and, if i can pick up a few guineas this way, i
feel they will be most _refreshing_, bread being so dear. if i go on
with it, i will apprise you of it, as you may like to see my thing's!
and the _tulip_, of all flowers, loves to be admired most.

pray pardon me, if my letters do not come very thick. i am so taken up
with one thing or other, that i cannot pick out (i will not say time,
but) fitting times to write to you. my dear love to lloyd and sophia,
and pray split this thin letter into three parts, and present them with
the _two biggest_ in my name.

they are my oldest friends; but ever the new friend driveth out the old,
as the ballad sings! god bless you all three! i would hear from lloyd,
if i could.

c. l.

flour has just fallen nine shillings a sack! we shall be all too rich.

tell charles i have seen his mamma, and have almost fallen in love with
_her_, since i mayn't with olivia. she is so fine and graceful, a
complete matron-lady-quaker. she has given me two little books. olivia
grows a charming girl--full of feeling, and thinner than she was.

but i have not time to fall in love.

mary presents her _general compliments_. she keeps in fine health!

huzza! boys, and down with the atheists.

[coleridge, having sent his wife and hartley into the country, had, for
a while, taken up his abode with lamb at pentonville, and given up the
_morning post_ in order to proceed with his translation of schiller's
_wallenstein_. lamb's forgery of burton, together with those mentioned
in the next letter, which were never printed by stuart, for whom they
were written, was included in the _john woodvil_ volume, 1802, among the
"curious fragments, extracted from a commonplace book, which belonged to
robert burton, the famous author of the anatomy of melancholy." see the
_miscellaneous prose_, vol. i. of this edition.

"they are my oldest friends." coleridge and southey were, of course,
older. the ballad i have not found.

mrs. charles lloyd, sen., _nee_ mary farmer, and olivia, her second
daughter, had been staying in london. lamb had breakfasted with them.

the reference to atheists is explained by a passage from manning's
letter to lamb in march, 1800: "one thing tho' i must beg of you--that
is not to call me atheist in your letters--for though it may be mere
raillery in you, and not meant as a serious imputation on my faith, yet,
if the catholic or any other intolerant religion should [illegible] and
become established in england, (which [illegible] if the bishop of
r----r may be the case) and if the post-people should happen to open and
read your letters, (which, considering the sometimes quaintness of their
form, they may possibly be incited to do) such names might send me to
smithfield on a hurdle,--and nothing _upon earth_ is more discordant to
my wishes, than to become one of the smithfield illuminati."]




letter 53


charles lamb to thomas manning

[p.m. april 5, 1800.]

c.l.'s moral sense presents her compliments to doctor manning, is very
thankful for his medical advice, but is happy to add that her disorder
has died of itself.

dr. manning, coleridge has left us, to go into the north, on a visit to
his god wordsworth. with him have flown all my splendid prospects of
engagement with the "morning post," all my visionary guineas, the
deceitful wages of unborn scandal. in truth, i wonder you took it up so
seriously. all my intention was but to make a little sport with such
public and fair game as mr. pitt, mr. wilberforce, mrs. fitzherbert, the
devil, &c.--gentry dipped in styx all over, whom no paper javelin-lings
can touch. to have made free with these cattle, where was the harm?
'twould have been but giving a polish to lampblack, not nigrifying a
negro primarily. after all, i cannot but regret my involuntary virtue.
damn virtue that's thrust upon us; it behaves itself with such
constraint, till conscience opens the window and lets out the goose.

i had struck off two imitations of burton, quite abstracted from any
modern allusions, which it was my intent only to lug in from time to
time to make 'em popular. stuart has got these, with an introductory
letter; but, not hearing from him, i have ceased from my labours, but i
write to him today to get a final answer. i am afraid they won't do for
a paper. burton is a scarce gentleman, not much known; else i had done
'em pretty well.

i have also hit off a few lines in the name of burton, being a conceit
of "diabolic possession." burton was a man often assailed by deepest
melancholy, and at other times much given to laughing and jesting, as is
the way with melancholy men. i will send them you: they were almost
extempore, and no great things; but you will indulge them. robert lloyd
is come to town. he is a good fellow, with the best heart, but his
feelings are shockingly _un_sane. priscilla meditates going to see
pizarro at drury lane to-night (from her uncle's) under cover of coming
to dine with me... _heu! tempora! heu! mores!_--i have barely time to
finish, as i expect her and robin every minute.--yours as usual.

c. l.

[for coleridge's movements see note to the next letter.--"pizarro" was
sheridan's drama. it was acted this season, 1799-1800, sixty-seven
times. lamb's next letter to manning, which is not available for this
edition, contained the promised copy of the "conceit of diabolical
possession." it also contained a copy of thekla's song in "wallenstein,"
in lamb's translation (see vol. iv.), which he says is better than the
original "a huge deal". finally lamb copies the old ballad "edward,
edward" and calls it "the very first dramatic poem in the english
language."]




letter 54


charles lamb to s. t. coleridge
[probably april 16 or 17, 1800.]

i send you, in this parcel, my play, which i beg you to present in my
name, with my respect and love, to wordsworth and his sister. you blame
us for giving your direction to miss wesley; the woman has been ten
times after us about it, and we gave it her at last, under the idea that
no further harm would ensue, but she would once write to you, and you
would bite your lips and forget to answer it, and so it would end. you
read us a dismal homily upon "realities." we know, quite as well as you
do, what are shadows and what are realities. you, for instance, when you
are over your fourth or fifth jorum, chirping about old school
occurrences, are the best of realities. shadows are cold, thin things,
that have no warmth or grasp in them. miss wesley and her friend, and a
tribe of authoresses that come after you here daily, and, in defect of
you, hive and cluster upon us, are the shadows. you encouraged that
mopsey, miss wesley, to dance after you, in the hope of having her
nonsense put into a nonsensical anthology. we have pretty well shaken
her off, by that simple expedient of referring her to you; but there are
more burrs in the wind. i came home t'other day from business, hungry as
a hunter, to dinner, with nothing, i am sure, of _the author but hunger_
about me, and whom found i closeted with mary but a friend of this miss
wesley, one miss benje, or benjey--i don't know how she spells her name.
i just came in time enough, i believe, luckily to prevent them from
exchanging vows of eternal friendship. it seems she is one of your
authoresses, that you first foster, and then upbraid us with. but i
forgive you. "the rogue has given me potions to make me love him." well;
go she would not, nor step a step over our threshold, till we had
promised to come and drink tea with her next night. i had never seen her
before, and could not tell who the devil it was that was so familiar. we
went, however, not to be impolite. her lodgings are up two pairs of
stairs in east street. tea and coffee, and macaroons--a kind of cake i
much love. we sat down. presently miss benje broke the silence, by
declaring herself quite of a different opinion from d'israeli, who
supposes the differences of human intellect to be the mere effect of
organization. she begged to know my opinion. i attempted to carry it off
with a pun upon organ; but that went off very flat. she immediately
conceived a very low opinion of my metaphysics; and, turning round to
mary, put some question to her in french,--possibly having heard that
neither mary nor i understood french. the explanation that took place
occasioned some embarrassment and much wondering. she then fell into an
insulting conversation about the comparative genius and merits of all
modern languages, and concluded with asserting that the saxon was
esteemed the purest dialect in germany. from thence she passed into the
subject of poetry; where i, who had hitherto sat mute and a hearer only,
humbly hoped i might now put in a word to some advantage, seeing that it
was my own trade in a manner. but i was stopped by a round assertion,
that no good poetry had appeared since dr. johnson's time. it seems the
doctor has suppressed many hopeful geniuses that way by the severity of
his critical strictures in his "lives of the poets." i here ventured to
question the fact, and was beginning to appeal to names, but i was
assured "it was certainly the case." then we discussed miss more's book
on education, which i had never read. it seems dr. gregory, another of
miss benjey's friends, has found fault with one of miss more's
metaphors. miss more has been at some pains to vindicate herself--in the
opinion of miss benjey, not without success. it seems the doctor is
invariably against the use of broken or mixed metaphor, which he
reprobates against the authority of shakspeare himself. we next
discussed the question, whether pope was a poet? i find dr. gregory is
of opinion he was not, though miss seward does not at all concur with
him in this. we then sat upon the comparative merits of the ten
translations of "pizarro," and miss benjey or benje advised mary to take
two of them home; she thought it might afford her some pleasure to
compare them _verbatim_; which we declined. it being now nine o'clock,
wine and macaroons were again served round, and we parted, with a
promise to go again next week, and meet the miss porters, who, it seems,
have heard much of mr. coleridge, and wish to meet _us_, because we are
_his_ friends. i have been preparing for the occasion. i crowd cotton in
my ears. i read all the reviews and magazines of the past month against
the dreadful meeting, and i hope by these means to cut a tolerable
second-rate figure.

pray let us have no more complaints about shadows. we are in a fair way,
_through you_, to surfeit sick upon them.

our loves and respects to your host and hostess. our dearest love to
coleridge.

take no thought about your proof-sheets; they shall be done as if
woodfall himself did them. pray send us word of mrs. coleridge and
little david hartley, your little reality.

farewell, dear substance. take no umbrage at any thing i have written.

c. lamb, _umbra_.

land of shadows,
shadow-month the 16th or 17th, 1800.

coleridge, i find loose among your papers a copy of "_christabel_." it
wants about thirty lines; you will very much oblige me by sending me the
beginning as far as that line,--

"and the spring comes slowly up this way;"

and the intermediate lines between--

"the lady leaps up suddenly.
the lovely lady christabel;"

and the lines,--

"she folded her arms beneath her cloak,
and stole to the other side of the oak."

the trouble to you _will be small_, and the benefit to us _very great_!
a pretty antithesis! a figure in speech i much applaud.

godwin has called upon us. he spent one evening here. was very friendly.
kept us up till midnight. drank punch, and talked about you. he seems,
above all men, mortified at your going away. suppose you were to write
to that good-natured heathen--"or is he a _shadow_?" if i do not
_write_, impute it to the long postage, of which you have so much cause
to complain. i have scribbled over a _queer letter_, as i find by
perusal; but it means no mischief.

i am, and will be, yours ever, in sober sadness,

c. l.

write your _german_ as plain as sunshine, for that must correct itself.
you know i am homo unius linguae: in english, illiterate, a dunce, a
ninny.

[having left lamb, coleridge went to grasmere, where he stayed at dove
cottage with wordsworth and finished his translation, which was ready
for the printer on april 22. to what lamb alludes in his reference to
the homily on "realities" i cannot say, but presumably coleridge had
written a metaphysical letter on this subject. lamb returns to the
matter at the end of the first part of his reply.

miss wesley was sarah wesley (1760-1828), the daughter of charles wesley
and, therefore, niece of the great john and samuel. she moved much in
literary society. miss benjay, or benje, was in reality elizabeth ogilvy
benger (1778-1827), a friend of mrs. inchbald, mrs. barbauld and the
aikins, and other literary people. madame de stael called her the most
interesting woman she had met in england. she wrote novels and poems and